




CHAPTER III

ROME


The culture conditions of Rome seem to cause no perplexity even to those
who find Greek civilisation a mystery. They are certainly obvious
enough. By reason of the primary natural direction of Roman life to
plunder and conquest, with a minimum of commerce and peaceful contacts,
Roman culture was as backward as that of Greece was forward. The early
Etruscan culture having been relegated to the status of arch¾ology,
however respectfully treated,[398] and the popular language having
become that of all classes, the republican period had to begin again at
the beginning. Latin literature practically commenced in the third
century B.C., when that of Greece was past its meridian; and the fact
that Lucius Andronicus and N¾vius, the early playwrights, were men of
Greek culture, and that Ennius translated the Greek rationalist Evmeros
(Euhmeros), point to the Hellenic origins of Rome's intellectual life.
Her first art, on the other hand, was substantially derived from the
Etruscans, who also laid the simple beginnings of the Roman drama, later
built upon under Greek influence. But even with the Etruscan
stimulus--itself a case of arrested development--the art went no great
way before the conquest of Greece; and even under Greek stimulus the
literature was progressive for only two centuries, beginning to decline
as soon as the Empire was firmly established.

Of the relative poverty of early Roman art, the cause is seen even by
Mommsen to lie partly in the religious environment, religion being the
only incentive which at that culture stage could have operated (and this
only with economic fostering); but the nature of the religious
environment he implicitly sets down as usual to the character of the
race,[399] as contrasted with the character of the Greeks. Obviously it
is necessary to seek a reason for the religious conditions to begin
with; and this is to be found in the absence from early Rome of exactly
those natural and political conditions which made Greece so manifold in
its culture. We have seen how, where Greece was divided into a score of
physically "self-contained" states, no one of which could readily
overrun the others, Rome was placed on a natural career of conquest; and
this at a culture stage much lower than that of Ionic Greece of the same
period. Manifold and important culture contacts there must have been for
Hellenes before the Homeric poems were possible; but Rome at the
beginning of the republican period was in contact only with the other
Italic tribes, the Phoenicians, the Grecian cities, and the Etruscans;
and with these her relations were hostile. In early Ionia, again, Greek
poetry flourished as a species of luxury under a feudal system
constituted by a caste of rich nobles who had acquired wealth by
conquest of an old and rich civilisation. Roman militarism began in
agricultural poverty; and the absorption of the whole energies of the
group in warfare involved the relegation of the arts of song and poetry
to the care of the women and boys, as something beneath adult male
notice.[400] Roman religion in the same way was left as a species of
arch¾ology to a small group of priests and priestly aristocrats, charged
to observe the ancient usages. It would thus inevitably remain
primitive--that is, it would remain at a stage which the Greeks had
mostly passed at the Homeric period; and when wealth and leisure came,
Greek culture was there to over-shadow it. To say that the Latins
racially lacked the mythopoeic faculty is to fall back on the old plan
of explaining phenomena in terms of themselves. As a matter of fact, the
mere number of deities, of personified forces, in the Roman mythology is
very large,[401] only there is lacking the embroidery of concrete
fiction which gives vividness to the mythology of the Greeks. The Romans
relatively failed to develop the mythopoeic faculty because their
conditions caused them to energise more in other ways.[402]

There is, however, obvious reason to believe that among the Italian
peoples there was at one time a great deal more of myth than has
survived.[403] What is preserved is mainly fragments of the mythology of
one set of tribes, and that in only a slightly developed form. All the
other Italic peoples had been subdued by the Romans before any of them
had come into the general use of letters;[404] and instead of being put
in a position to develop their own myths and cults, or to co-ordinate
the former in the Greek fashion, they were absorbed in the Roman system,
which took their Gods to its pantheon, and at the same time imposed on
them those of Rome. Much of their mythic lore would thus perish, for the
literate Romans had not been concerned to cultivate even their own.
Early Roman life being divided between war and agriculture, and there
being no free literary class to concern itself with the embellishment of
the myths, there subsisted only the simple myths and rituals of
agriculture and folklore, the numerous list of personified functions
connected with all the phases of life, and the customary ceremonial of
augury and invocation in war. The augurs and pontifices were the public
men and statesmen, and they made religion a State function. What occult
lore there was they made a class monopoly--an effectual preventive in
itself of a Hellenic development of myth. Apart from the special sets or
colleges of priests there were specially appointed colleges of
religio-arch¾ological specialists--first, the six augurs and the five
_pontifices_, then the _duoviri sacris faciundis_, afterwards increased
to ten and to fifteen, who collected Greek oracles and saw to the
Sibylline books; later the twenty _fetiales_ or heralds, and so on.
"These colleges have been often, but erroneously, confounded with the
priesthoods. The priesthoods were charged with the worship of a specific
divinity; the skilled colleges, on the other hand, were charged with the
preservation of traditional rules regarding the more general religious
observances.... These close corporations supplying their own vacancies,
of course from the ranks of the burgesses, became in this way the
depositaries of skilled arts and sciences."[405]

Religion being thus for centuries so peculiarly an official matter of
settled tradition, no unauthorised myth-maker could get a hearing. Even
what was known would be kept as far as possible a corporation
secret,[406] as indeed were some of the mystery practices in Egypt and
Greece. But whereas in Greece the art of sculpture, once introduced, was
stimulated by and reacted on mythology in every temple in every town,
the rigid limitation of early Roman public life to the business of war
would on that side have closed the door on sculpture,[407] even if it
could otherwise have found entrance. The check laid on the efflorescence
of the religious instinct was a double check on the efflorescence of
art. The net result is described with some exaggeration by an eminent
mythologist, in a passage which reduces to something like unity of idea
the tissues of contradiction spun by Mommsen:--

     For the Latins their Gods, although their name was legion, remained
     mysterious beings without forms, feelings, or passions; and they
     influenced human affairs without sharing or having any sympathy
     with human hopes, fears, or joys. Neither had they, like the Greek
     deities, any society among themselves. There was for them no
     Olympos where they might gather and take counsel with the father of
     Gods and men. They had no parentage, no marriage, no offspring.
     They thus became a mere multitude of oppressive beings, living
     beyond the circle of human interests, yet constantly interfering
     with it; and their worship was thus as terrible a bondage as any
     under which the world has yet suffered. Not being associated with
     any definite bodily shapes, they could not, like the beautiful
     creations of the Greek mind, promote the growth of the highest art
     of the sculptor, the painter, and the poet.[408]

It is necessary here to make some corrections and one expansion. The
statement as to parentage, marriage, and offspring is clearly wrong. Cox
here follows Keightley, whose pre-scientific view is still common.
Keightley admits that the early Latin Gods and Goddesses occur in pairs,
as Saturn and Ops, Janus and Jana; and that they were called _Patres_
and _Matres_.[409] To assert after this that they were never thought of
as generating offspring, merely because the bulk of the old
folk-mythology is lost, is to ascribe uncritically to the Latins an
abstention from the most universal forms of primitive myth-making. The
proposition as to "terrible bondage," again, cannot stand historically;
for, to say nothing of the religions of Mexico and Palestine, and some
of those of India, the Roman life was certainly much less darkened by
creed than has been that of many Christian countries, for instance
Protestant Scotland and Catholic Spain.

     [M. Boissier (_La religion romaine_, i, 2) decided that the Romans
     were religiously ruled more by fear than hope, and that their
     worship consisted chiefly of "timid supplications and rigorous
     expiations." Mommsen, on the other hand (ch. xii, p. 191),
     pronounces that "the Latin religion was grounded mainly on man's
     enjoyment of earthly pleasures." Both statements would be equally
     true of all ancient religions. Compare M. Boissier's later remarks,
     pp. 21-25, 26, 28, wherein he contradicts himself as does Mommsen.]

As regards, again, the failure of the early Latin pantheon to stimulate
sculpture and poetry, it has to be noticed that sculpture and poetry
tended to make as well as to be made by mythology in Greece. The
argument against the Latin pantheon is in fact an argument in a circle.
If the Latin Gods were not "associated with any definite bodily shapes"
(parentage, marriage, and offspring they certainly _had_), it could only
be when and _because_ they were not yet sculptured. Greek Gods before
they were sculptured would be conceived just as variably. Were _they_
then thought of as formless? The proposition is strictly inconceivable.
Latin Gods must have been imagined very much as were and are those of
other barbarous races, who are notoriously thought of as having sex,
form, and passions. Greek mythology simply reached the art stage sooner.
The cults of Hellas did not start with a mythology full-blown, thereby
creating the arts; the mythology grew step by step with and in the arts,
in a continuous mutual reaction; many Greek myths being really tales
framed to explain the art-figures of other mythologies, Egyptian and
Asiatic. Thus the primitive bareness of the Latin mythology signifies
not a natural saplessness which could give no increase to art, but (1)
loss of lore and (2) a lack of the artistic and literary factors which
record and stimulate higher mythologic growth.

Thus limited in their native culture, the Roman upper class were
inevitably much affected by higher foreign cultures when they met these
under conditions of wealth and leisure. Long before that stage, indeed,
they consulted Greek oracles and collected responses; and they had
informally assimilated before the conquest a whole series of Greek Gods
without giving them public worship.[410] The very Goddess of the early
Latin League, the Aventine Diana, was imaged by a copy of Artemis of
Ephesus, the Goddess of the Ionian League.[411] As time went on the more
psychologically developed cults of the East were bound to attract the
Romans of all classes. What of religious emotion there was in the early
days must have played in large part around the worship which the State
left free to the citizens as individuals--the worship of the _Lares_ and
_Penates_, the cults of the hearth and the family; and in this
connection the primitive mythopoeic instinct must have evolved a great
deal of private mythology which never found its way into literature. But
as the very possession of _Lares_ and _Penates_, ancestral and domestic
spirits, was originally a class privilege, not shared by the landless
and the homeless, these had step by step to be made free of public
institutions of a similar species--the _Lares Praestites_ of the whole
city, festally worshipped on the first day of May, and other _Lares
Publici_, _Rurales_, _Compitales_, _Viales_, and so on--just as they
were helped to bread. Even these concessions, however, failed to make
the old system suffice for the transforming State; and individual
foreign worships with a specific attraction were one by one inevitably
introduced--that of ®sculapius in the year 291 B.C., in a panic about
pestilence; that of Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, in 205: both by
formal decision of the Senate. The manner of the latter importation is
instructive. Beginning the Hannibalic war in a spirit of religious
patriotism, the Senate decreed the destruction of the temples of the
alien Isis and Serapis.[412] But as the war went on, and the devotion
shown to the native Gods was seen to be unrewarded, the Senate
themselves, yielding to the general perturbation which showed itself in
constant resort to foreign rites by the women,[413] prescribed resort to
the Greek sacrificial rites of Apollo.[414] Later they called in the
cult of Cybele from Phrygia;[415] and other cults informally, but none
the less irresistibly, followed.

In all such steps two forces were at work--the readiness of the
plebeians to welcome a foreign religion in which the patricians had, as
it were, no vested rights; and the tendency of the more plastic
patricians themselves, especially the women, to turn to a worship with
emotional attractions. When the plebeians sought admission for their
class to the higher offices of State, they were told with unaffected
seriousness that their men had not the religious qualifications--they
lacked the hereditary gift of reading auspices, the lore of things
sacred.[416] So, when they did force entrance, their alleged blunders in
these matters were exclaimed against as going far to ruin the republic.
This was not a way to make the populace revere the national religion;
and as the population of foreign race steadily increased by conquest and
enslavement, alien cults found more and more hold. "It was always in the
popular quarters of the city that these movements began."[417]

The first great unofficial importation seems to have been the orgiastic
worship of Dionysos, who specially bore for the Romans his epithet of
Bacchus, and was identified with their probably aboriginal _Liber_. This
worship, carried on in secret assemblies, was held by the conservatives
to be a hotbed of vice and crime, and was, according to Livy, bloodily
punished (B.C. 186). So essentially absurd, however, is Livy's childish
narrative that it is impossible to take anything in it for certain save
the bare fact that the worship was put under restrictions, as tending to
promote secret conspiracies.[418] But from this time forward, roughly
speaking, Rome may be said to have entered into the mythological
heritage of Greece, even as she did into her positive treasure of art
work and of oriental gold. Every cult of the conquered Mediterranean
world found a footing in the capital, the mere craving for new
sensations among the upper class being sufficient to overcome their
political bias to the old system. It is clear that when Augustus found
scores of Roman temples in disrepair after the long storms of the civil
wars, it was not that "religion" was out of vogue, but that it was
superseded by what the Romans called "superstition"--something
extraneous, something over and above the public system of rites and
ceremonies. In point of fact, the people of Rome were in the mass no
longer of Roman stock, but a collection of many alien races, indifferent
to the indigenous cults. The emperor's restorations could but give a
subsidised continuity to the official services: what vitally flourished
were the cults which ministered to the new psychological needs of a
population more and more divorced from great public interests, and
increasingly alien in its heredity--the stimulant and hysterical
worships of Adonis, of Attis, of the Lover Goddess coupled with the
first, or the Mourning Mother Goddess with the second, of Isis and
Osiris and their child--rituals of alternate lamentation and rejoicing,
of initiations, austerities, confessions, penances, self-abasement, and
the promise of immortality. On the general soil of devotion thus formed,
there finally grew up side by side Mithraism and Christianity, the rival
religions of the decadence, of which the second triumphed in virtue of
having by far the larger number of adaptations to its environment.

But while Rome was thus at length fully possessed by the spirit of
religious imagination which had so fruitfully stirred the art of Greece,
there ensued no new birth of faculty. It was with the arts as with
literature: the stimulus from Greece was received by a society rapidly
on the way to that social state which in Greece had choked the springs
of progress. In the last generations of the Republic the literary
development was markedly rapid. In the century which saw Rome, after a
terrific struggle, victorious over Carthage and prepared for the grapple
with Macedon, the first practitioners of literature were playwrights, or
slaves, or clients of great men, or teachers like Ennius, who could find
in the now leisured and in part intelligent or at least inquisitive
upper class a sufficient encouragement to a literary career. That class
did not want recitals of the crude folklore of their fathers, so
completely eclipsed by that of Greece, which was further associated with
the literary form of drama, virtually new to the Romans.[419] Drama,
always the form of literature which can best support itself, is the form
most cultivated down till the period of popular abasement and civil
convulsion, though of a dozen dramatists we have only Plautus and
Terence left in anything like completeness; and while the tragedy of
Pacuvius and Attius was unquestionably an imitation of the Greek, it may
have had in its kind as much merit as the comedies that have been
preserved. Even more rapid than the development, however, is the social
gangrene that kills the popular taste; for when we reach the time of
Augustus there is no longer a literary drama, save perhaps for the small
audiences of the wooden theatres, and the private performances of
amateurs;[420] parades and pantomimes alone can attract the mindless
multitude; and the era of autocrats begins on well-laid foundations of
ignorance and artificial incivilisation.

As with the literature of the people, so with that of the lettered
class. In the last generation of freedom, we have in Lucretius and
Catullus two of the great poets of all antiquity, compared with whose
forceful inspiration Virgil and Horace already begin to seem sicklied
o'er with the pale cast of decline. Thenceforth the glory begins to die
away; and though the red blade of Juvenal is brandished with a hand of
power, and Lucan clangs forth a stern memorial note, and Petronius
sparkles with a sinister brilliancy, there is no mistaking the downward
course of things under C¾sarism. It is true we find Juvenal complaining
that only the emperor does anything for literature:--

   Et spes et ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum.
   Solus enim tristes hac tempestate Camoenas
   Respexit.[421]

It is the one word of praise he ever gives to the autocrat, be it
Domitian or another; and the commentators decide that only at the
beginning of Domitian's reign would it apply. In effect, the satire is a
description of the Roman upper class as grown indifferent to poetry, or
to any but their own. But it is not on the economic side that the
autocracy and the aristocracy of the Empire are to be specially
indicted. The economic difficulty was very much the same under the
Republic, when only by play-writing could literary men as such make a
living. As Juvenal goes on to say, Horace when he cried Evohe was well
fed, and if Virgil had lacked slave and lodging the serpents would have
been lacking to the fury's hair, and the tongueless trumpet have sounded
nothing great. Lucretius, Catullus, and Virgil were all inheritors of a
patrimony; and Horace needed first an official post and later a patron's
munificence to enable him to live as a poet. The mere sale of their
books could not possibly have supported any one of them, so low were
prices kept by the small demand.[422] What was true of the poets was
still truer of the historians. Thus in the Republic as in the Empire,
the men of letters, apart from the playwrights, tended to be drawn
solely from the small class with inherited incomes. The curse of the
Empire was that even when the sanest emperors, as the Antonines, sought
to endow studies,[423] they could not buy moral or intellectual energy.
The senate of poltroons who crouched before the Neros and Caligulas were
the upper-class version of the population which lived by bread and the
circus; and in that air neither great art nor great thought could
breathe. Roman sculpture is but enslaved Greek sculpture taken into pay;
Latin literature ceases to be Roman with Tacitus. The noble apparition
of Marcus Aurelius shines out of the darkening ages like some unearthly
incarnation, collecting in one life and in one book all the light and
healing left in the waning civilisations; beside the babble of Fronto
his speech is as that of one of the wise Gods of the ancient fantasy.
Henceforth we have but ancillary history, and, in imaginative
literature, be it of Apuleius or of Claudian, the portents of another
age. _Roma fuit._

The last stages of the transition from the pagan to the Middle Ages can
best be traced in the history of the northern province of Gaul.
Subjected to regular imperial administration within a generation of its
conquest by C¾sar, Gaul for some centuries actually gained in
civilisation, the imperial regimen being relatively more favourable to
nearly every species of material progress than that of the old
chiefs.[424] The emperors even in the fourth century are found
maintaining there the professorships of rhetoric, language, law,
philosophy and medicine first founded by Marcus Antoninus;[425] and
until finance began to fail and the barbarians to invade, the material
conditions were not retrograde. But the general intellectual life was
merely imitative and retrospective; and the middle and upper classes,
for which the higher schools existed, were already decaying in Gaul as
elsewhere. The old trouble, besides, the official veto on all vital
political discussion--if indeed any appetite for such discussion
survived--drove literature either into mere erudition or into
triviality. On the other hand, the growing Church offered a field of
ostensibly free intellectual activity, and so was for a time highly
productive, in point of sheer quantity of writing; a circumstance
naturally placed by later inquirers to the credit of its creed. The
phenomenon was of course simply one of the passage of energy by the line
of least resistance. Within the Church, to which they turned as did
thoughtful Greeks to philosophy after the rise of Alexander's Empire,
men of mental tastes and moderate culture found both shelter and
support; and the first Gaulish monasteries, unlike those of Egypt and
the East, were, as M. Guizot has noted, places for conference rather
than for solitary life.[426] There, for men who believed the creed,
which was as credible as the older doctrines, there was a constant
exercise for the mind on interests that were relatively real, albeit
profoundly divided from the interests of the community. Thus, at a time
when the community needed all its mental energy to meet its political
need, that mental energy was spent in the discussion of insoluble and
insane problems, of predestination and freewill, of faith and works, of
fasts, celibacy, the Trinity, immortality, and the worship of saints.
Men such as Ambrose and Jerome in Italy, Paulinus, Cassian, Hilary, and
Salvian in Gaul, Chrysostom in the East, and Augustine in the South,
represent as it were the last vibrations of the civilised intelligence;
their energy, vainly spent on what they felt to be great issues, hints
of the amount of force that was still running to waste throughout the
Empire.

Soon, however, and even before the barbarian tide had overflowed the
intellectual world, the fatal principle at the core of the new creed
began to paralyse even the life that centred around that. In a world of
political tyranny, an established church claiming to stand for the whole
of supernatural truth must needs resort to tyranny as soon as it could
wield the weapons. The civil strifes which broke out alike in the
Eastern and the Western Empire in the third and fourth centuries, and
the multitude of sects which rapidly honeycombed the Church, wore so
many more forces of social disintegration; and churchmen, reasoning that
difference of dogma was the ground of civil warfare as well as of war in
the Church, must needs take the course that had before been taken in
politics.

After the original Arian battle had raged itself out in Egypt, Gregory
of Nazianzun at Constantinople, Ambrose at Milan, and Martin at
Tours,[427] fought it over again. One point secured, others were settled
in turn; and as soon as the influence of Augustine set up a prevailing
system of thought, theology was as much a matter of rule and precedent
as government. As we read Augustine's _City of God_, with its strenuous
demonstration that the calamities which men ascribe to the new religion
are the fruit of their own misdeeds, we realise to the full the
dissolution of antiquity. All that is valid in his polemic is the
exposure of the absurdity of the old faiths, long before detected by the
reason of the few, but maintained by believers and unbelievers alike for
reasons of State. The due Nemesis came in the rise of a faith which
first flourished on and promoted an utter disregard of State concerns,
then helped directly to rob the State of the mental energy it most
needed, and finally wrought for the paralysis of what mental energy
itself had attracted. Of constructive truth, of the thought whereby a
State could live, the polemist had much less than was once possessed by
the men who framed or credited the fables he derided. He could destroy,
but could not build up. And so it was with the Church, as regarded the
commonweal. "Of all the various systems of government that have been
attempted on this earth, theocracy, or more properly hierocracy, is
undoubtedly one of the very worst."[428]

But one thing the Church could construct and conserve--the fabric of her
own wealth and power. Hence it came about that the Church, in itself a
State within the State, was one of the three or four concrete survivals
of antiquity round which modern civilisation nucleated. Of the four, the
Church, often treated as the most valuable, was really the least so,
inasmuch as it wrought always more for the hindrance of progress and the
sundering of communities than for advance and unification. The truly
civilising forces were the other three: the first being the body of
Roman law, the product of Roman experience and Greek thought in
combination; and the second, the literature of antiquity, in large part
lost till the time we call the New Birth, when its recovery impregnated
and inspired, though it perhaps also overburdened and lamed, the
unformed intelligence of modern Europe. The third was the heritage of
the arts of life and of beauty, preserved in part by the populations of
the western towns which survived and propagated their species through
the ages of dominant barbarism; in part by the cohering society of
Byzantium. From these ancient germs placed in new soil is modern
civilisation derived.




EPILOGUE

A GENERAL VIEW OF DECADENCE


We are now, perhaps, in a position to contemplate the wood without being
distracted by the trees, and without forgetting, on the other hand, that
it is an aggregate of trees individually conditioned by aggregation.

The record of Gr¾co-Roman, as of all other ancient civilisation, with
the partial exception of that of China, is one of a complete
decadence--in this case a twofold decadence: a passing from collective
energy and achievement to collective decrepitude and mental impotence,
from intellectual freedom and force to the dogmatic arrest of thought,
from artistic splendour to the very negation of the finest forms of art.
However we may dispute about the nature of progress, we all agree that
this was decadence. Not even the Christian Greek, the least freethinking
of educated moderns, supposes that the life of his race went upwards
from the time of Constantine. The Italian to this day aspires--by way of
Tripoli, among other things--to bear some comparison with the Roman,
whose "greatness" he envies. Decadence, then, is confessed. It concerns
us, if we would have a historical philosophy at all, to think it all in
terms of general causation.

At the outset, we shall do well to realise that in the long
transmutation there was no day, save those of sudden and dire disaster,
on which the human elements of the State organisms concerned were
collectively conscious of any great change in their way of life. And
days of dire disaster had occurred in the times to which we look back as
those of energetic expansion. Early Rome had been actually captured by
Etruscans, by Gauls; "she" had ostensibly come to the verge of overthrow
by Hannibal a whole era before she was sacked by the Goths; Athens had
been sacked by the Persians long before the Roman invasion. What was the
determining difference in the consciousness of the citizens at the two
epochs? Clearly that between the minds of men wont to "fend for
themselves" collectively and of men wont to be ruled and prescribed for
by a master--a difference, therefore, in power of resistance and of
recovery. And this difference had itself been wrought by long
mutations--from the day of Sulla to the day of Tiberius in Rome, from
the day of Alexander to that of Sulla in Greece. No one generation had
been born in full "freedom," to pass away in complete subordination to
an autocrat. The earlier generations, like the later, had been
habituated to slave-owning, superstition, and the thought of war. The
substantial and fatal change was in the degree of simple average manhood
among the free. National decadence, in a word, is loss of manhood--a
thing not easily lost.

A Conservative statesman of our day, wont to apply analytic criticism
chiefly for partisan purposes, has attempted a comparatively
disinterested analysis of the problem before us, in a short but not
inconsiderate survey of the decadence of the old world. At the outset he
rightly notes the inconsistency with which men still tend to hold by the
old idea of an inevitable ageing and ultimate decrepitude of States and
civilisations, while holding no less confidently to the modern notion,
practically unattained by the ancients, of an inevitable progress.
"Why," he asks, "_should_ civilisations thus wear out and great
communities decay? and what evidence is there that in fact they
do?"[429] It may or may not be by reason of political bias that the
questioner--who indeed avows that he is pursuing one of "those wandering
trains of thought where we allow ourselves the luxury of putting
wide-ranging questions, to which our ignorance forbids any confident
reply"--propounds no clear answer to either query, contenting himself
with suggesting that modern civilisation, in virtue of its strengthening
hold on physical science, stands a chance of escaping the doom that fell
on the old. But such a curtailed answer moves us afresh to seek a more
complete one.

Our questioner, contemplating the "fall" of Rome, argues that the cause
cannot have been even so serious an evil as slavery, which had been in
operation from the beginning. He overlooks the fact that it had greatly
increased in the period of far-reaching conquest,[430] and so misses an
element in the solution. Passing over this, he recognises one proximate
"cause," diminution of population; and he in effect seems to trace to
this source the secondary factor of fiscal collapse--the breaking down
of the tax-paying classes everywhere under the ever-increasing burden of
State exaction. The final fiscal process he oddly describes as "a crude
experiment in socialism." Putting the decay of population and the
increase of burdens together, he pronounces that "they absolutely
require themselves to be explained by causes more general and more
remote"; and his answer--confessedly a mere restatement of the
problem--is just the word "Decadence." The process is simply formulated,
once more, in terms of its name. The questioner does not even take the
further analytical step of asking how the Eastern Empire came to endure
a thousand years longer than the Western; and why the decadence did not
similarly operate there.

If anything has been made out in the foregoing survey, we have got
further than this; and indeed from any point of view the arrest of the
analysis is surprising. Supposing failure of population to be the
central phenomenon, we have obviously to ask: What were the political
differentia of the progressive and the ostensibly declining states of
population? How were the peoples ruled when they were strong, expansive,
and collectively equal to their burdens? Surely the answer is obvious.
Republican Greece and Republican Rome were self-governing communities,
or aggregates of such, supporting themselves by individualist production
of all kinds, breeding beyond and not under the apparent limit of
food-production. When Romanised Italy ceased to produce a sufficiency of
men, she had ceased to produce a sufficiency of things; and this latter
failure, entailing the other, can be shown to have been a direct result
of the exaction of all manner of subsistence from conquered territories.
So far, there is no mystery.

Our querist, however, affirms a diminution of population not only in
Italy but throughout the Empire. Here we must first question the
assertion. Pestilences, such as that of 166 A.C., doubtless visited most
parts of the Empire; but pestilences belong also to the pre-imperial
period, and need not here be specially considered. As to Greece, the
facts have been already given. The depopulation of that, after
Alexander, was primarily a matter of exodus to the richer conquered
lands, where a new Hellenistic civilisation arose under purely monarchic
rule, and therefore unaccompanied by the all-round, self-developing
mental energy which had marked the life of "free" Greece. In Byzantium,
of course, the mental stagnation, under Christian autocracy, was no less
complete. But there is no evidence whatever that after Constantine the
principle of population failed in the Eastern Empire, especially when
that was restricted by the amputation of the tributary territories.[431]

Did population then fail in Gaul and Spain and Africa? If so, when? As
to Gaul, there is evidence that after the conquest population and
productivity increased, though the latter had not previously been
low--witness the loot taken by C¾sar at Toulouse. Gaul was certainly
taxed exorbitantly; but Julian, as we saw, prudently lessened the drain;
and Mommsen describes both Gaul and Spain as flourishing in their
Romanised period.[432] They continued, in fact, to be, with North
Africa, the main sources of the revenue of the Western Empire down to
its collapse. Materially, they in some respects went forward, notably in
the case of the region of old Carthage. The element wherein they were
decadent was precisely that of free manhood, everywhere eviscerated by
autocratic and bureaucratic rule. Therefore it was that, like
Britain--similarly productive of revenue in the imperial period--they
were unable to defend themselves against the final barbarian inroads.
Had Honorius carried out his scheme for a measure of Home Rule in
Gaul,[433] and followed it up by a similar scheme for Spain, Italy
indeed might all the sooner have lost her hold on them as milch kine,
but both provinces might conceivably have developed a new life centuries
before they historically did.

The Conservative statesman has in fact, and very naturally, excluded
from consideration the central political factor. Echoing the
Gibbon-Mommsen-Renan thesis as to the excellence of the Antonine
government of the Mediterranean world, he ignores as those writers did
the vital problem: Wherein lies the felicity of a world wholly at the
mercy of the chance of the election of a good emperor by a mercenary
soldiery? To fall back on phrases about the Empire "respecting local
feelings, encouraging local government," and being "accepted by the
conquered as the natural organisation of the world," is merely to burke
the real issue as to the political viability of communities satisfied
with such a system, content to rest the social pyramid forever on its
apex. To say that the conditions of the Empire under the Antonines were
"getting better" is merely to close the eyes to the frightful hazard of
imperial succession. A world absolutely dependent for its
betterment--nay, even for its safe continuance--on the chance of a good
succession of despots is a world doomed by the mere law of variation.

If we will but gauge moral and economic forces in human affairs as we
gauge physical forces in that toil of science of which the Conservative
statesman has learned to recognise the efficacy, we shall deliver
ourselves from the mystery-mongering which he is fain to substitute for
the old shibboleth of "the divine will." To trace causation in a known
civilisation is not to pretend either to understand all social sequences
in all ages or to predict the destinate future: it is but to recognise
the real reactions of human proclivities and procedures which habit and
prejudice have been wont to contemplate uncritically. The late Sir John
Seeley, who at times hardly advances on Kingsley as an interpreter of
history, grappled in his day with our problem; and he too specified the
Antonine age as a notably hopeful period, from which he dates the
decadence:--

     "A century of unparalleled tranquillity and virtuous government is
     followed immediately by a period of hopeless ruin and dissolution.
     A century of rest is followed not by renewed vigour, but by
     incurable exhaustion. Some principle of decay must have been at
     work; but what principle? We answer: it was a period of sterility
     or barrenness in human beings; the human harvest was bad. And among
     the causes of this barrenness we find, in the more barbarous
     nations, the enfeeblement produced by the too abrupt introduction
     of civilisation and universally the absence of industrial habits,
     and the disposition to listlessness which belongs to the military
     character."[434]

One is tempted to apply the theory of human crops to the case of the
chair of history at Cambridge. Prof. Seeley's theory is an edifying
variant on that of Mr. Balfour. Where one thesis finds the key to all in
the emperor, the other sees failure of the human harvest the moment the
imperial succession goes wrong. And while the Professor offers the
semblance of a reason for the alleged failure in the human breed, it is
really too nugatory for discussion. If the "barbarous nations" alluded
to were Gaul and Spain, they had suffered the "abrupt introduction of
civilisation" more than two hundred years before. Egypt and Syria and
Greece and North Africa had older civilisations than the Roman. Germany
was not decadent. The decay of industrial life in Italy had begun long
before the Empire. As well might we say that a bad human crop there had
preceded the Etruscan conquest, the invasion by Hannibal, and the civil
wars. To cite, as does Prof. Seeley, the pestilence of the year 166 as a
beginning of depopulation, is to ignore the problem of three hundred
years of previous depopulation in Italy, and to set up a misconception
as to the rest of the Empire. According to Gibbon, the long pestilence
of the years 250-265 was the worst of all.[435]

More plausibly, Prof. Seeley goes on to argue that "what the plague had
been to the population, that the _fiscus_ was to industry. It broke the
bruised reed; it converted feebleness into utter and incurable debility.
Roman finance had no conception of the impolicy of laying taxation so as
to depress enterprise and trade. The _fiscus_ destroyed capital in the
Roman Empire. The desire of accumulation languished where the Government
lay in wait for all savings--_locupletissimus quisque in pr¾dam
correptus_. All the intricate combinations by which man is connected to
man in a progressive society disappeared."[436] But this is a finally
excessive description of a process which had been in full swing in the
time of Cicero, and which subsisted for three hundred years after Marcus
Aurelius in the West. A generation after Marcus came the powerful
Severus, whose son Caracalla could find millions of money to build his
immense baths at Rome, still monstrous in their ruins; and seventy years
after Caracalla, Diocletian, wielding the Empire at its utmost
extension, could build still vaster baths for the imperial city at which
he had ceased to dwell. With a debased silver coinage,[437] the emperors
of that day seemed to feel no fatal lack of real revenue, and
maintained, at great cost, huge armies for the control and defence of
their enormous realm.

It is impossible to see why the age of the Antonines should be taken as
a turning point in the Empire's history rather than the age of
Diocletian. That great organiser seems to have partly provoked the
insurrection of the Bagaudae in Gaul by taxation; but the Bagaudae were
a _jacquerie_ oppressed by the nobles, as their fathers had been before
C¾sar, and as their posterity was long afterwards; and their wrongs may
as well have been at the hands of their lords as at those of the
autocrat.[438] However that might be, Roman rule in Gaul survived the
revolt of the Bagaudae, yielding a great revenue to Constantine; and at
the time of the fall of Rome Gaul was much more productive than Italy.
All this is beside the case. To say that "the downfall of the Empire is
accounted for" by the _fiscus_[439] is to raise the question whether the
Empire, as such, could have been run by any other method. The Professor
himself pronounces that "Government in its helplessness was driven" to
fiscal oppression. Then fiscal oppression belonged to the nature of the
Empire. Once more we return to the true line of sequence and
explanation. Every step and stage in decadence belonged to the process
of conquest, of confiscation, of subjection of foreign races, who were
made to pay for the vast machinery that kept them subject till they were
unfit for self-defence.

     [What is true of the Roman fisc was true till the other day of the
     Turkish, another product of militarist imperialism, similarly
     collateral with mental stagnation. Depopulation and arrest of
     production in the East under Turkish rule are to be explained in
     substantially the way in which we have explained them for ancient
     Rome. And it is significant that the prospect of regeneration for
     Turkey has begun after the amputation of many of the provinces over
     which she maintained an alien rule. Her future visibly depends on
     the continuance of the processes of self-maintenance and
     development of the principle of self-government throughout the
     subsisting State.]

There is a danger that, in insisting on the primarily moral causation of
the process of social disease and decay, we may on the one hand relapse
into a delusive sense of moral superiority, and on the other hand fail
to realise how the subjective moral divagation becomes politically
effectual in structural and economic change. It is the understood
process of causation that is alone truly instructive. But the
instruction is deepened in the ratio of our realisation of the decay.
Though it is clear that before Rome many a civilisation had gone to
violent wreck, there is in recorded history no more overwhelming memory
of long triumph and long downfall than that "from the far-distant
morning when a small clan of peasants and shepherds felled the forests
on the Palatine to raise altars to its tribal deities, down to the
tragic hour in which the sun of Gr¾co-Latin civilisation set over the
deserted fields, the abandoned cities, the homeless, ignorant, and
brutalised peoples of Latin Europe."[440] And this whole tremendous arc
of triumph and decline is to be understood as the historic expression of
the specially conditioned bias of conquest in one people.

The decline is the due sequence of the "rise": everything roots in the
wrong relation of communities throughout the Empire. The extension of
such a social disease as slavery is one of the symptoms, one of the
sequel¾, of the central malady.[441] A totally progressive State
eliminates or minimises slavery; a declining one fails to do so. The
economic malady involved affects primarily the dominant or parasitic
State or central part, its condition of parasitism being more deadly
than its draining effect on the others. _Their_ malady lay in their
state of subjugation, which was an impoverishment of character and
political faculty; and thus it came about that the collapse of the
centre of organisation meant the fall of the entire civilisation of
Western Europe before the new barbarism.

Rome had so visibly ruined all that we are apt to forget how the process
of moral and political retrogression had begun in the Greek world long
before. There, however, the Roman conquest was but a consummation; and
the economic and political continuance of the Eastern Empire was
concurrent with a moral and intellectual contraction which was never
recovered from. In a word, varying conditions determined the differences
of continuance and evolution in the two spheres. But the causation is
none the less clear throughout.

It might be supposed that this reverberating lesson could have been read
in only one way--as a warning to the nations against taking the Roman
road of conquest and dominion. And yet it is doubtful whether modern
States have been at all guided by that lesson, as compared with the
extent to which they have been overruled by the sheer difficulty of
repeating the evolution. The problem has been faced by Lord Cromer, a
ripe ruler, in his very scholarly essay on _Ancient and Modern
Imperialism_. The experienced administrator is quite alive to the
analogy between the part played of old by Rome around the Mediterranean
and in Europe, and that played to-day by England in India and, in some
measure, in Egypt. Raised in some degree above the ordinary
hallucination of mere dominion, the confused pride of the average man in
his country's rule over large portions of the earth, the veteran
governor notes that, whereas there was a general acquiescence of the
subject peoples in the imperial rule of Rome, no _imperium_ to-day has
won any such cordial acceptance.[442] Neither France in Algeria and
Tunis nor Britain in India and Egypt is an assimilating and unifying
power. We may note the proximate explanation, which he does not at first
give--to wit, the sundering force of crystallised religious systems. As
he later puts it, following Sir Alfred Lyall, religions make nations,
where the Romans had to deal with tribes.[443] But that need not greatly
affect our view of the political problem, which would remain if the
religious factor were eliminated; and it is over the political problem
that Lord Cromer most significantly balances.

Falling back on the method of fatalism, he pronounces, like others
before him, "that Rome, equally with the modern expansive Powers, more
especially Great Britain and Russia, was impelled onwards by the
imperious and irresistible necessity of acquiring defensible frontiers;
that the public opinion of the world scoffed 2,000 years ago, as it does
now, at the alleged necessity; and that each onward move was attributed
to an insatiable lust for extended dominion."[444] As in all fatalistic
reasoning, we are here faced by radical self-contradiction. The "public
opinion of the world," which Lord Cromer allows to include a large part
of Roman opinion,[445] could not scoff at an "irresistible necessity":
it knew that it was no more irresistibly necessary for A to conquer B
than for B to conquer A; and in ascribing to Rome an "insatiable lust
for extended dominion" it merely credited Rome with an appetite known to
inhere in all States. Rome succeeded in her aim; others failed. Pisa,
overborne by Florence, had in her day overborne other communities. Lord
Cromer has begged the vital question, which is: Can States, or can they
not, live neighbourly? To say that Rome could not because of the
ambitions or menaces of others is idle: the menace was reciprocal.

For practical purposes, of course, the thesis is sometimes adequate all
round, as when France and Britain, face to face in North America and in
India, strove each to oust the other. But at times the plea becomes
visibly farcical, as in the recent case of Russia in the Far East, and
the earlier case of Britain with regard to Afghanistan. We can all
remember the temporary growth of the doctrine of "a scientific
frontier." First you want a river; then you need the territory beyond
the river; then you need the line of hills commanding that territory;
then the territory behind the hills becomes a _sine qua non_.[446] In
this case the doctrine has disappeared with the policy, and _that_
disappeared simply because it failed. The event has proved that the
doctrine was a chimera. And nobody to-day probably will maintain that
Russia lay under an imperious and irresistible necessity to go and be
defeated by the Japanese in Manchuria; or that she could not conceivably
have stopped short of that extremity.

The use sometimes made of the word "cupidity" is apt to obscure the
problem. There is cupidity of power and conquest as well as of
territory, revenue, plunder. Roman cupidity was of all kinds. But so was
that of "the" Greeks. Lord Cromer employs the old false
dichotomy--above discussed--that marks the Greeks as "individualistic"
and the Romans as somehow unitary.[447] As we have seen, the original
Roman City-State was just the same kind of thing as the Greek: it was
opportunity that made "the Romans" expand, whereas "the Greeks," down to
Alexander, remained segregated in their States. What was common and
fatal to both, what led Greece to dissolution and Rome to downfall, was
the primary impulse to combat, the inability to refrain from jealousy,
hate, and war. And for the moderns, seeing this, the problem is, Can
they refrain?

Either we are thus to learn from history, or all history is as a novel
without a purpose. And Lord Cromer, as a man of action, cannot in effect
take this attitude, though he recoils from any clear statement of the
lesson. On the one hand, he makes the most of the differentia between
ancient and modern Imperialism. English rulers in India, he admits,
originally aimed at home revenue, and did for a time practise sheer
plunder;[448] the British rule no longer does either: which is in effect
an admission that one "imperious and irresistible necessity" of the
Roman rule has been successfully resisted--shall we say, by modern
enlightenment? But he will not frankly take the further step and say
that for the ideal of dominion over backward races we should substitute
the ideal of their education and purposive evolution. Rather he makes
the most of the difficulties, enlarging in the familiar fashion on the
dividedness and differentiation of the Indian peoples and the relative
stationariness of Islam: two undeniable propositions, of which the first
is nothing to the purpose, since we are discussing the lines of
progressive policy; while the second merely incurs the rejoinder that
Christendom was long as stationary as Islam, and that Christian
Abyssinia is so still.

As was, indeed, to be expected, Lord Cromer will rather homologate the
whole Roman process, decadence and collapse and all, than pronounce it
what it was, a vast divagation in human progress. Ultimately he does not
even blench at the proposition that the whole ruin "had to" take
place[449] by way of preparing for the civilisation that was to follow,
even as he argues that "the" Romans "had to" undertake fresh wars where
they (on the urging, as he admits, of their wisest men) had sought to
evade further conquest by recognising "buffer States"[450]--as who
should say that whatever course a majority or a Government do take "had
to" be taken. The answer to such reasoning is the mention of the fact,
which he admits, that it was "a supreme principle of the Roman
Government to acknowledge no frontier Power with equal rights."[451] Can
it be still a question whether that principle is to be transcended?

On the final issue as to what the ruling nations "have to" do to-day as
regards the subject peoples, the disinterested student can hardly
hesitate, however the ex-administrator may feel bound to balance. "The
Englishman," Lord Cromer tells us, truly enough as regards the average
citizen, "would be puzzled to give any definite answer" to the question
_Quo vadis?_ in matters imperial.[452] He may well be, when Lord Cromer
visibly is, despite the ostensible emphasis with which he exhorts his
countrymen to keep "the _animus manendi_ strong within them."[453] The
danger is that, noting the formal conclusion rather than the implicit
lesson of Lord Cromer's very able survey, "the Englishman" may turn from
his puzzle to some new insanity of imperialism. Not many years have
passed since English wiseacres were speculating on a "break-up" of
China, and a dominion of some other State over her huge area and
multitudinous millions. He would be a bad sample of modernity who should
now regret that China is apparently on the way, like Japan, to build up
a new progressive civilisation in the "unchanging East."[454] But it is
perhaps as much to the sheer impracticability of further great conquests
as to any alert and conscious reading of the lesson of history that we
owe the growing disposition of modern States to seek their good in their
own development. If so, provided that the ideal be changed, "it is well,
if not _so_ well."




PART IV

THE CASE OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS


NOTE ON LITERATURE

     No quite satisfactory history of Italy has appeared in English. The
     standard modern Italian history, that of Cesare Cant, has been
     translated into French; but in English there has been no general
     history of any length since Procter and Spalding. Col. Procter's
     _History of Italy_ (published as by G. Perceval, 1825; 2nd ed.
     1844) has merit, but is not abreast of modern studies. Spalding's
     _Italy and the Italian Islands_ (3 vols. 3rd ed. 1845) is an
     excellent work of its kind, covering Italian history from the
     earliest times, but is also in need of revision. The comprehensive
     work of Dr. T. Hodgkin, _Italy and her Invaders_ (2nd ed. 1892-99,
     8 vols.) comes down to the death of Charlemagne.

     Of special histories there are several. One of the best and latest
     is that of _The Lombard Communes_, by Prof. W.F. Butler (1906).
     Captain H.E. Napier, in the preface to his _Florentine History_
     (1846, 6 vols.) rightly contended that "no people can be known by
     riding post through their country against time"; but his six
     learned volumes are ill-written and ill-assimilated. The best
     complete history of Florence, the typical Italian Republic, is the
     long _Histoire de Florence_ by F.T. Perrens (9 tom. 1877-84; Eng.
     tr. of one vol. by Hannah Lynch, 1892). T.A. Trollope's _History of
     the Commonwealth of Florence_ (1865, 4 vols.) is less indigestible
     than Napier's, but is gratuitously diffuse, and is written in large
     part in unfortunate imitation of the pseudo-dramatic manner of
     Carlyle. It is further blemished by an absurd index. Neither this
     nor Mr. W. Carew Hazlitt's _History of the Venetian Republic_
     (1860, 4 vols.; new ed. in two large vols. 1900) has much
     sociological value, though the latter is copious and painstaking,
     albeit also diffuse. The _Genoa_ of J. Theodore Bent (1881) is an
     interesting sketch; but the well-read author fails in orderly
     construction.

     A good short manual is the _Italy_ of Mr. Hunt (Macmillan's
     Historical Course); and an excellent compendium is supplied by the
     two treatises of Oscar Browning (1894-95), _Guelphs and
     Ghibellines_ (covering the period 1250-1409) and _The Age of the
     Condottieri_, covering the Renaissance, to 1530. Bryce and Hallam
     are alike helpful to general views; and it is still profitable to
     return to the condensed _History of the Italian Republics_ by
     Sismondi (written for the English "Cabinet Cyclop¾dia" in 1832),
     though it needs revision in detail. In his two volumes entitled
     _The Fall of the Roman Empire_ (1834) that author has given a
     useful conspectus of the period covered by Gibbon's great work.
     Sismondi's larger and earlier _Histoire des rŽpubliques italiennes_
     has never ceased to be well worth study, though the _Geschichte von
     Italien_ of H. Leo (1829) improves upon it in several respects. It
     has been revised and condensed (Routledge, 1 large vol. 1906) by
     Mr. William Boulting. For the early period the most comprehensive
     survey is the _Geschichte Italiens im Mittelalter_ of Ludo Moritz
     Hartmann (3 Bde. in 5, 1897-1911) which comes down to the tenth
     century.

     Among modern monographs that of Alfred von Reumont on _Lorenzo de'
     Medici_ (Eng. tr. 1876, 2 vols.) in nearly every way supersedes the
     old work of Roscoe, whose _Leo X_, again, is practically superseded
     by later works on the Renaissance, in particular those of
     Burckhardt (Eng. tr. of Geiger's ed. in 1 vol. 1892) and the late
     J.A. Symonds. Miss Duffy has a good chapter on Florentine trade and
     finance in her _Story of the Tuscan Republics_, 1892; and the short
     work of F.T. Perrens, _La civilisation florentine du 13e au 16e
     sicle_ (1892--in the _Bibliothque d'histoire illustrŽe_) is
     luminous throughout; but Ranke's _History of the Latin and Teutonic
     Nations_ (Eng. tr. 1887), which deals with the Italy of 1494-1514,
     is little more than a sand-heap of incident. On the economic side
     there is a good research in Pignotti's essay on Tuscan Commerce in
     his _History of Tuscany_ (Eng. tr. 1823, vol. iii). Much
     interesting detail is given, with much needless rhetoric, in _The
     Guilds of Florence_, by Edgcumbe Staley, 1906.

     Of great general value is the elaborate work of Gregorovius,
     _Geschichte der Stadt Rom im Mittelalter_ (4te Aufl. 8 Bde.
     1886-96; Eng. tr. by Mrs. Hamilton, 8 vols. 1895-1902), which,
     however, suffers from the disparity of its purposes, combining as
     it does, a topographical history of the city of Rome with a full
     history of its politics. It remains a valuable mass of materials
     rather than a history proper. The same criticism applies to the
     very meritorious _Geschichte der Stadt Rom_ of A. von Reumont (3
     Bde. 1867-70), which begins with the very origin of the city, and
     comes down to our own time.

     But there has risen in contemporary Italy a school of historical
     students who are rewriting the history of the great period in the
     light of the voluminous archives which have been preserved by
     municipalities. One outcome of this line of investigation is Prof.
     Villari's _The Two First Centuries of Florentine History_ (Eng. tr.
     of first 2 vols. 1894). New light, further, has been thrown on the
     commercial history of Italy in the Dark Ages and early Middle Ages
     by the admirable research of Prof. W. von Heyd, of which the
     French translation by Furcy Raynaud, _Histoire du commerce du
     Levant an moyen age_ (1886, 2 tom.) is recast and considerably
     enlarged by the author, while the Renascence period is illuminated
     by R. Pšhlmann's treatise, _Die Wirthschafts Politik der
     Florentiner Renaissance und das Princip der Verkehrsfreiheit_
     (Leipzig, 1878).
