It is still common, among men who professedly accept the theory of
evolution, to speak of special culture developments, notably those of
sculpture and literature in Greece, art in medieval Italy, and
theocratic religion in Judea, as mysteries beyond solution. It may be
well, then, to consider some of these developments as processes of
social causation, in terms of the general principles above outlined.

     [A rational view was reached by the sociologists of the eighteenth
     century, by whom the question of culture beginnings was much
     discussed--_e.g._, Goguet's _De l'origine des lois, des arts, et
     des sciences_, 1758; Ferguson's _Essay on the History of Civil
     Society_, 1767; and Hume's essay on the _Rise and Progress of the
     Arts and Sciences_. At the end of the century we find the solution
     scientifically put by Walckenaer: "Ainsi le germe de gŽnie et des
     talens existe dans tous les tems, mais tous les tems ne sont pas
     propres ˆ le faire Žclore" (_Essai sur l'histoire de l'espce
     humaine_, 1798, 1. vi, ch. xx, _Des sicles les plus favorables aux
     productions de gŽnie_, pp. 348, 349). In England forty years later
     we find Hallam thus exemplifying the obscurantist reaction: "There
     is only one cause for the want of great men in any period--nature
     does not think fit to produce them. They are no creatures of
     education and circumstances" (_Literature of Europe_, pt. i, ch.
     iii, ¤ 35). A kindred though much less crude view underlies Sir
     Francis Galton's argument in _Hereditary Genius_. Cp. the present
     writer's paper on "The Economics of Genius," in _The Forum_, April,
     1898 (rep. in _Essays in Sociology_, vol. ii), and the able essay
     of Mr. Cooley, there cited. My esteemed friend, Mr. Lester Ward
     (_Dynamic Sociology_, ii, 600, 601), seems to me, as does Mill
     (_System of Logic_, bk. vi, ch. iv, ¤ 4; cp. Bain, _J.S. Mill_, p.
     146), to err somewhat on the opposite side to that of Hallam and
     Galton, in assuming that faculty is nearly equal in all, given only
     opportunity.]

And first as to Greece. As against the common conception of the Hellenic
people as "innately" artistic, it may be well to cite the judgment of an
artist who, if not more scientific in his method of reaching his
opinion, has on the whole a better right to it in this case than has the
average man to his. It is a man of genius who writes[319]: "A favourite
faith, dear to those who teach, is that certain periods were especially
artistic, and that nations, readily named, were notably lovers of art.
So we are told that the Greeks were, as a people, worshippers of the
beautiful, and that in the fifteenth century art was ingrained in the
multitude....Listen! There never was an artistic period. There never was
an Art-loving nation." This, which was sometime a paradox, is when
interpreted one of the primary truths of sociology.

Our theorist goes on to describe the doings of the first artist, and the
slow contagion of his example among men similarly gifted, till the
artistic species had filled the land with beautiful things, which were
uncritically used by the non-artistic; "and the Amateur was unknown--and
the Dilettante undreamed of." Such is the artist's fairy tale of
explanation. The probable fact is that the "first artists" in historic
Greece were moved to imitative construction by samples of the work of
foreigners. If, on the other hand, we decide that the "race" had evolved
relatively high artistic capacities before it reached its Greek or Asian
home,[320] it will still hold good that the early ®gean evolution owed
much to ancient Oriental and Egyptian example. The Greeks as we know
them visibly passed from primitive to high art in all things. Having
first had fetish Gods of unshapen stone, they made Gods in crudely human
shape, at first probably of wood, later of stone. So with vases,
goblets, tables, furniture, and ware of all sorts, all gradually
developing in felicity of form up to a certain point, whereafter art
worsened. What we require to know is the why of both processes.

_Pace_ the artist, it is clear that artistic objects were multiplied
mainly because they were in steady economic demand. The shaping impulse
is doubtless special, and in its highest grades rare; but there must
also have been special conditions to develop it in one country in the
special degree. That is to say, the faculty for shaping, for design, was
oftener appealed to in Greece than elsewhere, and was allowed more
freedom in the response, thus reaching new excellence. The early Greeks
can have had no very delicate taste, satisfied as they were with statues
as primitive as the conventional Assyrian types they copied.

     Prof. Burrows, in his valuable work on _The Discoveries in Crete_
     (1907), somewhat confuses one of his problems by assuming that, on
     a given chronological view, the creators of the early ®gean
     civilisation were "the most progressive and artistic part of the
     race" (p. 193). No such assumption can be valid on any chronology.
     Every "part" of a race, broadly speaking, has the same total
     potentialities. The determinants are the special _evocative_
     conditions, which may be either culture contacts or economic
     fostering. A rational view of the growth of Greek art is put by Dr.
     Mahaffy, despite his endorsement of Mr. Freeman's extravagant
     estimate of Athenian intelligence:--"However national and diffused
     it [art] became, this was due to careful study, and training, and
     legislation, and not to a sort of natural compulsion.... As natural
     beauty was always the exception among Greek men, so artistic talent
     was also rare and special" (_Social Life in Greece_, 3rd ed. p.
     430). All the remains, as well as every principle of sociological
     science, go to support this view of the case. When Reber asserts
     (_Hist. of Ancient Art_, Eng. tr. 1883, p. 264) that "the very
     first carvings of Greece had a power of development which was
     wanting in all the other nations of that period," he is setting up
     an occult principle and obscuring the problem. The other nations of
     _that period_ were not in progressive stages; but some of them had
     progressed in art in their time. And many of the "very first" Greek
     works--that is, of the "historic" period, as distinguished from the
     "Minoan"--are enormously inferior to some very ancient Egyptian
     work.

The development of taste was itself the outcome of a thousand steps of
comparison and specialisation, art growing "artistic" as children grow
in reasonableness and in nervous co-ordination. And the special
conditions of historic Greece were roughly these:--

(1) The great primary stimulus to Greek art, science, and thought,
through the contact of the early settlers in Asia Minor with the remains
of the older Semitic civilisation,[321] and the further stimuli from
Egypt.

(2) Multitude of autonomous communities, of which the members had
intercourse as kindred yet critical strangers, emulous of each other,
but mixing their stocks, and so developing the potentialities of the
species.

(3) Multitude of religious cults, each having its local temples, its
local statues, and its local ritual practices.

(4) The concourse in Athens, and some other cities, of alert and capable
men from all parts of the Greek-speaking world,[322] and of men of other
speech who came thither to learn.

(5) The special growth of civic and peaceful population in Attica by the
free incorporation of the smaller towns in the franchise of Athens.
Athens had thus the largest number of free citizens of all the Greek
cities to start with,[323] and the maximum of domestic peace.

(6) The maintenance of an ideal of cultured life as the outcome of these
conditions, which were not speedily overridden either by (_a_)
systematic militarism, or (_b_) industrialism, or (_c_) by great
accumulation of wealth.

(7) The special public expenditure of the State, particularly in the age
of Pericles, on art, architecture, and the drama, and in stipends to the
poorer of the free citizens.

Thus the culture history of Greece, like the political, connects vitally
from the first with the physical conditions. The disrupted character of
the mainland; the diffusion of the people through the ®gean Isles; the
spreading of colonies on east and west, set up a multitude of separate
City-States, no one of which could decisively or long dominate the rest.
These democratic and equal communities reacted on each other, especially
those so placed as to be seafaring. Their separateness developed a
multitudinous mythology; even the Gods generally recognised being
worshipped with endless local particularities, while most districts had
their special deities. For each and all of these were required temples,
altars, statues, sacred vessels, which would be paid for by the
public[324] or the temple revenues, or by rich devotees; and the
countless myths, multiplied on all hands because of the absence of
anything like a general priestly organisation, were an endless appeal to
the imitative arts. Nature, too, had freely supplied the ideal medium
for sculpture and for the finest architecture--pure marble. And as the
political dividedness of Hellenedom prevented even an approach to
organisation among the scattered and independent priests, so the
priesthood had no power and no thought of imposing artistic limitations
on the shapers of the art objects given to their temples. In addition to
all this, the local patriotism of the countless communities was
constantly expressed in statues to their own heroes, statesmen, and
athletes. And in such a world of sculpture, formative art must needs
flourish wherever it could ornament life.

We have only to compare the conditions in Judea, Persia, Egypt, and
early Rome to see the enormous differentiation herein implied. In
Mazdean Persia and Yahwistic Judea there was a tabu on all divine
images, and by consequence on all sculpture that could lend itself to
idolatry.[325] (This tabu, like the monotheistic idea, was itself the
outcome of political and social causation, which is in large part
traceable and readily intelligible.) In Italy, in the early historic
period, outside of Etruria, there had been no process of culture-contact
sufficient to develop any of the arts in a high degree; and the relation
of the Romans to the other Italian communities in terms of situation and
institutions[326] was fatally one of progressive conquest. Their
specialisation was thus military or predaceous; and the formal
acceptance of the deities of the conquered communities could not prevent
the partial uniformation of worship. Thus Rome had nearly everything to
learn from Greece in art as in literature. In Egypt, again, where
sculpture had at more than one time, in more than one locality, reached
an astonishing excellence,[327] the easily maintained political
centralisation[328] and the commercial isolation made fatally for
uniformity of ideal; and the secure dominion of the organised
priesthood, cultured only sacerdotally, always strove to impose one
stolid conventional form on all sacred and ritual sculpture,[329] which
was copied in the secular, in order that kings should as much as
possible resemble Gods. Where the bulk of Greece was "servile to all the
skyey influences," physically as well as mentally, open on all sides to
all cultures, all pressures, all stimuli, Egypt and Judea and Persia
were relatively iron-bound, and early Rome relatively inaccessible.

Finally, as militarism never spread Spartan-wise over pre-Alexandrian
Greece, and her natural limitations prevented any such exploitation of
labour as took place in Egypt, the prevailing ideal in times of peace,
at least in Attica, was that of the cultured man, kalokagathos,
supported by slave labour but not enormously rich, who stimulated art as
he was stimulated by it. Assuredly he was in many cases a dilettante, if
not an amateur, else had art been in a worse case.

     It is to be remembered that in later Greece, from about the time of
     Apelles, all free children were taught to draw (Pliny, _Hist. Nat._
     xxxv, 36, 15); and long before, the same authority tells us, art
     was taken up by men of rank. The introduction of painting into the
     schools at Sicyon took place about 350 B.C., and thence the
     practice spread all over Hellas. Aristotle, too (_Politics_, v
     [viii], 3), commends the teaching of drawing to children, noting
     that it enables men to judge of the arts and avoid blunders in
     picture-buying--though he puts this as an inferior and incidental
     gain. Thus the educated Greeks were in a fairly good sense all
     dilettanti and amateurs. On the whole subject see K.J. Freeman,
     _Schools of Hellas_, 1908, pp. 114-17.


¤ 2

In literature Greek development is as clearly consequent as in art. The
Homeric poems are the outcome of a social state in which a class of
bards could find a living by chanting heroic tales to aristocratic
households. Lyric genius is indeed something specially incalculable; and
it is startling to realise that about the time of the rude rule of
Peisistratos at Athens, Sappho in Lesbos was not merely producing the
perfect lyrics which to this day men reckon unmatched, but was the
centre of a kind of school of song. But Lesbos was really the home of an
ancient culture--"the earliest of all the ®olic settlements, anterior
even to Kym"[330]--and Sappho followed closely upon the lyrists
Pittakos and Alkaios. So that here too there is intelligible causation
in environment as well as genius. In other directions it is patent. The
drama, tragic and comic alike, was unquestionably the outcome of the
public worship of the Gods, first provided for by the community, later
often exacted by it from rich aspirants to political power. Greek drama
is a clear evolution, on the tragic side, from the primitive ritual of
Dionysos, Beer-God or Wine-God; individual genius and communal fostering
combining to develop a primitive rite into a literary florescence.[331]
For all such developments special genius is as a matter of course
required, but potential genius occurs in all communities in given forms
at a given culture stage; and what happened in Athens was that the
special genius for drama was specially appealed to, evoked, and
maintained. ®schylus in Egypt and Aristophanes in Persia must have died
with all their drama in them. Further, as Grote has so luminously
shown,[332] the juridical life of Athens, with its perpetual play of
special pleading in the dikasteries, was signally propitious to the
spirit of drama. The constant clashing and contrast of ethical points of
view, the daily play of eristic thought, was in itself a real drama
which educated both dramatists and audience, and which inevitably
affected the handling of moral problems on the stage. Athens may thus be
said to have cultivated discussion as Sparta cultivated "Laconism"; and
both philosophy and drama in Greece are steeped in it. Myths thus came
to be handled on the stage with a breadth of reflection which was
nowhere else possible.

Historiography, science, and philosophy, again, were similarly fostered
by other special conditions. Abstract and physical science began for
Greece in the comparison and friction of ideas among leisured men,
themselves often travelled, living in inquisitive communities often
visited by strangers. What Egypt and Syria and Phoenicia had to give
in medical lore, in geometry, and in astronomy, was assimilated and
built upon, in an atmosphere of free thought and free discussion, whence
came all manner of abstract philosophy, analytical and ethical. Plato
and Aristotle are the peaks of immense accumulations of more primitive
thought beginning on the soil laid by Semitic culture in Asia Minor;
Socrates was stimulated and drawn out by the Athenian life on which he
didactically reacted; Hippocrates garnered the experience of many
medical priests. History was cultivated under similar conditions of
manifold intercourse and intelligent inquisitiveness. Herodotus put down
the outcome of much questioning during many travels, and he had an
appreciative public with similar tastes.[333] The manifold life of
Hellas and her neighbours, Egypt, Persia, Syria, was an endless ground
for inquiry and anecdote. The art of writing, acquired long before from
Phoenicia, was thus put to unparalleled uses; and at length the theme
of the Peloponnesian war, in which all the political passions of Hellas
were embroiled for a generation, found in Thucydides a historian
produced by and representative of all the critical judgment of the
critical Athenian age. Plutarch, in a later period, condenses a library
of lesser writers.

Thus in respect of every characteristic and every special attainment of
Greek life we can trace external causation, from the geographical
conditions upwards, without being once tempted to resort to the
verbalist explanation of "race qualities" or "national genius." If
Hellas developed otherwise than Phoenicia from any given date onwards,
the causes lay either in the environment or in the set previously given
to Phoenician life by its special antecedents, which in turn were
determined by environment. To suppose that "the Greeks" started
primordially with a unique connatural bent to a relatively "ideal"
method of life, preferring culture to riches and art to luxury, is to
entail the further assumption of a separate biological evolution from
the pre-human stage. To put the problem clearly, let us say that if we
suppose the ancestors of the Greeks three millenniums before Homer to
have been planted in Australia, with none of the domesticable animals
which have played so decisive a part in the development of human
societies, there is no good reason to think that the "race" would have
risen to any higher levels than had been reached by the Australian
aborigines at the time of their discovery by Europeans. One of the most
remarkable things about those aborigines is their disproportionately
high cranial capacity, which seems compatible with a mental life that
their natural environment has always precluded. Many plain traces of
gross primeval savagery remain in Greek literature and religion; and to
credit all Greek progress to a unique racial faculty is to turn the back
upon all the accumulating evidence which goes to show that from the
first entrance of the Greeks into Greece they blended with and
assimilated the culture of the races whom they found there.[334] The
futility of the whole racial thesis becomes evident, finally, the moment
we reflect how unequal Greek culture was; how restricted in Hellas, how
special to Athens was it on the intellectual side when once Athens had
reached her stature; how blank of thought and science was all Hellenic
life before the contact of Semitic survivals in Ionia; how backward were
many sections of the pagan Hellenic stock to the last; and how backward
they have been since the political overturn in antiquity.

     The vitiating concept of racial genius appears incidentally, but
     definitely, in Dr. Cunningham's contrast of Phoenicians and
     Greeks as relatively wealth-seekers and culture-seekers, ingrained
     barbarians and ingrained humanists (_Western Civilisation_, pp. 72,
     73, 98, 99, etc.), and in his phrase as to the persistent
     "principles which the Greek and the Phoenician respectively
     represented." The antithesis, it is here maintained, is spurious.
     Many Greeks were in full sympathy with the Phoenician norm; many
     Phoenicians must have been capable of delighting in the Greek
     norm had they been reared to it. At a given period the
     Phoenicians had a higher life than the Greeks; and had the
     Phoenicians evolved for ages in the Greek environment, with an
     equivalent blending of stocks and cross-fertilisation of cultures,
     they could have become all that the Greeks ever were. The assertion
     that when we see "the destruction and degradation of human life in
     the march of material progress, we see what is alien to the Greek
     spirit" (_id._ p. 99) will not bear examination. Greek slavery,
     like every other, was just such a degradation of human life. And to
     speak of a "consciousness of her mission" on the part of "Athens"
     (_id._ pp. 72, 73) is to set up a pseudo-entity and a moral
     illusion.

     It is remarkable that even among students well abreast of
     evolutionary thought there is still a strong tendency to think of
     Greek civilisation in terms of some occult virtue of "Hellenic
     spirit," something unique in social phenomena, something not to be
     accounted for like the process of evolution in other races. Thus so
     accomplished and critical a thinker as Prof. Gilbert Murray seems
     to account for every Greek advance beyond savagery as a result of
     "Hellenism." _E.g._, "Human sacrifice, then, is one of the
     barbarities which Hellenism successfully overcame" (_The Rise of
     the Greek Epic_, 1907, p. 16); "Solved by the progressive, or, I
     may say, by the Hellenic spirit" (_Id._ p. 25). In this way the
     discrediting and abandonment of the use of poisoned arrows in the
     "Homeric" period (_Id._ pp. 120-21) seems to be ascribed either to
     the Homeric or to the Hellenic "spirit."

     Now, Mr. Murray himself incidentally notes (p. 121) that poisoned
     weapons are forbidden in the Laws of Manu; and it might be pointed
     out that even among the barbaric and ill-advantaged Somali, when
     visited by Burton fifty years ago, the use of poisoned arrows was
     already restricted to "the servile class" (_First Footsteps in East
     Africa_, ed. 1910, p. 45; cp. p. 74). The use of poisoned arrows,
     in short, is common in savagery, and is transcended by all races
     alike when they rise some way above that level. The "Hellenes," to
     start with, were savages like the rest, and rose like others in
     virtue of propitious conditions. So with human sacrifice. According
     to Herodotus, the Egyptians had abandoned it before the Greeks.
     Shall we describe the Egyptian progress as a matter of "Egypticism"
     or "the Egyptian spirit"?

     Defences of the Greeks, such as that made so ably by Mr. Murray
     against the aspersions cast upon "Paganism" by uncritical
     Christians, are to be sympathetically received in the light of
     their purport; but the true historical method is surely not to
     exhibit the historic Greeks as "antitheses" to "the pagan man" of
     modern anthropology, but to show Christians how they and their
     creed have evolved from savagery even as did the Greeks. (Cp. the
     author's _Christianity and Mythology_, 2nd ed. p. 77 _sq._, as to
     the pro-Hellenic handling of Greek phenomena by other scholars.)

Should the general line of causation here set forth be challenged, it
will suffice, by way of test, to turn to the special case of Sparta. If
it were "Greek character" that brought forth Greek art, letters, and
science, they ought to have flourished in Greek Sparta as elsewhere. It
is, however, the notorious historic fact that during all the centuries
of her existence, after the pre-Lycurgean period, Sparta contributed to
the general deed of man virtually nothing, either in art or letters, in
science or philosophy.

     The grounds for holding that choral poetry flourished pre-eminently
     at Sparta (see K.O. MŸller, _History of the Dorians_, Eng. tr. ii,
     383) are not very strong. See Busolt, _Griechische Geschichte_,
     1885, i, 158, 159, for what can be finally said on this head. Ernst
     Curtius (_Griechische Geschichte_, 1858, i, 240) writes on this
     subject as a romantic enthusiast. Burckhardt (_Griechische
     Culturgeschichte_, i, 116-19) examines the subject with his usual
     care, but decides only that the Spartans employed music with a
     special eye to military education. And MŸller acknowledges that
     though many Spartan lyrists are named, "there has not been
     preserved a single fragment of Spartan lyric poetry, with the
     exception of Alkman's," the probable reason being "a certain
     uniformity and monotony in their productions, such as is perceived
     in the early works of art." On the whole question cp. K.J.
     Freeman's _Schools of Hellas_, chs. i and xi.

In the story of Hellas, Sparta stands almost alone among the peoples as
yielding no foothold to the life of the mind, bare of nearly all memory
of beauty,[335] indigent in all that belongs to the spirit, morally
sterile as steel. Yet "the Dorians of Laconia are perhaps the only
people in Greece who can be said to have preserved in any measure the
purity of their Greek blood."[336] Before such a phenomenon the dogma of
race-character instantly collapses, whereas in terms of the reaction of
conditions the explanation is entirely adequate. As thus:--

1. Sparta was by situation one of the most secluded of the Greek States.
In the words of Euripides, it was "hollow, surrounded by mountains,
rugged, and difficult of access to an enemy."[337] Compared in
particular with Athens, it was not only landward and mountain-walled,
but out of the way of all traffic.[338]

2. From the first the Spartans were balanced in a peculiar degree by the
strength of the Achaians, who were in the Peloponnesus before them, the
hostilities between the invaders and the older inhabitants lasting
longer in the valley of the Eurotas than anywhere else.[339] The Spartan
militarism was thus a special product of circumstances, not a result of
Doric "character," since other Dorian communities did not develop it.

3. Being thus so little open to commercial influence, and so committed
to a life of militarism, Sparta was susceptible of a rigidity of
military constitution that was impossible elsewhere in the Hellenic
world, save to some extent in the similarly aristocratic and undeveloped
communities of Thessaly and Crete, each similarly noted for
unintellectuality. Whatever be the political origins of these societies,
it is clear that that of Sparta could not have been built up or
maintained save under conditions of comparative isolation.

     Grote, always somewhat inclined to racial explanations, argues (ed.
     1888, ii, 262), as against K.O. MŸller, who had still stronger
     leanings of the kind, that the Spartans were not the "true Doric
     type," in that their institutions were peculiar to themselves,
     distinguishing them "not less from Argos, Corinth, Megara,
     Epidaurus, Siky™n, Korkyra, or Knidus, than from Athens or Thebes."
     This is doubtless true as against MŸller (cp. Kopstadt, cited by
     Grote; Cox, _General History of Greece_, 1877, p. 28; and MŽnard,
     _Histoire des Grecs_, 1884, pp. 218, 221), but the suggestion that
     the Spartans varied in respect of being _less_ "Doric" is equally
     astray. Grote goes on to note that "Krte was the only other
     portion of Greece in which there prevailed institutions in many
     respects analogous, yet still dissimilar in those two attributes
     which form the real mark and pinch of Spartan legislation--viz.,
     the military discipline and rigorous private training. There were
     doubtless Dorians in Krte, but we have no proof that these
     peculiar institutions belonged to them more than to the other
     inhabitants of the island." The argument cuts both ways. If it was
     not definitely "Dorian" to have such institutions, neither was it
     un-Dorian. As Cox observes (p. 30), the Spartan constitution in its
     earlier stages "much resembled the constitution of the Achaians as
     described in the _Iliad_." Equally arbitrary seems Grote's argument
     (i, 451) that "the low level of taste and intelligence among the
     Thessalians, as well as certain points of their costume,
     assimilates them more to Macedonians or Epirots than to Hellenes."
     He notes the equally low level of taste and intelligence among the
     Spartans, who as a rule could not read or write (ii, 307), and to
     whom he might as well have assimilated the Thessalians as to the
     Macedonians. In all cases alike culture conditions supply the true
     explanation. All through Greece, barring Sparta, stocks were
     endlessly mixed. M. MŽnard well points out in reply to MŸller that
     it is impossible to associate types of government with any of the
     special "races"--that as against Sparta there were "Ionian
     aristocracies at Marseilles and at Chalkis, and Dorian democracies
     at Tarentum and Syracuse," while most of the Greek cities had by
     turns aristocratic and democratic constitutions.

4. As regards Sparta, the specialisation of all life on the military
side developed a spirit of peculiar separateness and arrogance,[340]
which clinched the geographical influence. Where Greeks of all States
were admitted to the Eleusinian festivals, Sparta kept hers for her own
people.[341] This would limit her literary mythology, and by consequence
her art.

     Among the names of Greek sculptors only three belong to Sparta, and
     these are all of the sixth century B.C., the beginning of the
     historic period. After that, nothing. See Radford's _Ancient
     Sculpture_, Chron. List at end. Thus Sparta positively retrogressed
     into militarism. "There is evidence in the character of Alkman's
     poetry that he did not sing to a Sparta at all resembling the
     so-called Sparta of Lycurgus" (Mahaffy, _Problems in Greek
     History_, p. 77; cp. Burckhardt, _Griechische Culturgeschichte_, i,
     117).

5. Not only does military specialism preclude, so far as it goes, more
intellectual forms of activity: it develops in the highest degree the
conservative spirit[342] when thoroughly rooted in law and custom. Nor
is it any more favourable to moral feeling in general.[343]

As offset to all this it may be urged that the middle unenfranchised
class (the _Perioikoi_) in Sparta, the _Penestai_ in Thessaly, and the
ordinary citizens in Crete, were in some ways superior types to part of
the similar classes of Attica; while the slaves, as having some military
life, were, despite the flavour of the name "Helot," above the
average.[344] But even if that were so, it would not affect the problem
as to culture development, and its solution in terms of the primary and
secondary conditions of life for the given communities.

     It is to be noted that in Crete, less isolated by nature and way of
     life than either Sparta or Thessaly, less rigidly militarised than
     they and more democratic in constitution, there were more stirrings
     of mind. Epimenides, the author of the famous saying that the
     Cretans were always "liars, evil beasts, idle gluttons," was
     himself a distinguished Cretan. But Crete on the whole counts for
     very little in Greek culture-history. Cp. K.J. Freeman, _Schools of
     Hellas_, p. 38.


¤ 3

Such being, in brief, the process of the building up of culture for
Greece, it remains to note the causes of the process of retrogression,
which also connects broadly with the course of politics. Indeed, the
mere expansion of Hellenistic life set up by the empire-making of
Alexander might alone account for a complete change in the conditions
and phases of Greek civilisation. In the new Hellenistic world wealth
and power were to be won with ease and with amenity[345] where of old
there was only an alien barbarism, or at least a society which to the
cultured Greek was barbaric. When such cities as Alexandria and Antioch
beckoned the Greek scholar of small means, impoverished Athens could
hardly retain him. Her extorted revenue in her most powerful
period,[346] as we saw, was the source of her highest flight of artistic
splendour; and even after the Peloponnesian War, with greatly lessened
power, Athens was the most desirable dwelling-place in Hellas. After
Alexander, all this was insensibly changed: Athens, though for a time
filled with Greeks enriched by the plunder of Persia, must needs
gradually dwindle to the point at which the slight natural advantages of
her soil, industry, and situation would maintain her; and the life of
ideas, such as it finally was, passed inevitably to Alexandria, where it
was systematically encouraged and protected, in the fashion in which
well-meaning autocrats do such things. But while these new developments
were not inconsiderable, and included some rare felicities, they were on
the whole fatally inferior to the old, and this for reasons which would
equally affect what intellectual life was left in Greece proper.

The forces of hindrance were political and psychological;[347] and they
operated still more powerfully under the Romans than under the
successors of Alexander. The dominance of the Greeks over the other
races in the eastern provinces did not make them more than a class of
privileged tools of Rome; and they deteriorated none the less.[348] When
for the stimulating though stormy life of factious self-government there
was substituted the iron hand of a conqueror, governing by military
force, there was need of a new and intelligent discipline if the mental
atmosphere were not to worsen. All civilisation, in so far as it
proceeds from and involves a "leisured class," sets up a perpetual risk
of new morbid phases. Men must have some normal occupation if their life
is to be sound; and where that occupation is not handicraft it can be
kept sound and educative only by the perpetual free effort of the
intelligence towards new truth, new conception, and new
presentment.[349] Nor can this effort conceivably take place on any wide
scale, and with any continuity, save in a community kept more or less
generally alert by the agitation of vital issues. For a generation or
two after Alexander, it is true, there is no arrest in the production
of good philosophic minds among the Greeks; indeed, the sudden forcing
back of all the best remaining minds on philosophy, as the one mental
employment left to self-respecting men of leisure,[350] raised the
standards of the study, and led to the ethical systems of Epicurus and
Zeno, certainly fit in their way to stand beside those of Plato and
Aristotle. So, too, the thrusting back of the drama (which in the hands
of Aristophanes had meddled audaciously with every public question) on
the study of private life, developed in the highest degree the domestic
and psychological bent of the later comedy,[351] very much as the
autocracy has developed the novel in contemporary Russia. But the
schools of Epicurus and Zeno, both of which outlasted in moral credit
and in moral efficacy that of Plato,[352] and the new comedy of
Menander, alike represent the as yet unexhausted storage of the mental
energy generated by the old political life; and the development is not
prolonged in either case. Evidently something vital was lost: only a
renewal of the freer life could make possible a continuous advance in
intellectual power.

On this it is important to insist, as there are plausible grounds for
contrary inferences, which are often drawn. All supposed exceptions to
the law, however, will be found on analysis to be apparent only. A
tyranny may indeed give economic encouragement to art and culture, and a
republic may fail to do so; but the work of the tyranny is inevitably
undone or kept within a fixed limit by its own character; while, if the
free community be but fairly well guided, its potentialities are
unlimited. This is the solution of much modern dispute between the
schools of _laissez-faire_ and protection. A Velasquez, who might
otherwise have been condemned to seek his market with coarser wares, may
develop to perfection at the court of an autocrat of fine taste; but
even he partly depends for his progress on intelligent communion, which
the autocrat in this case chances to yield him. And from Velasquez
onward there is no progress. So, in autocratic Assyria, sculpture
reaches a certain point and becomes for ever conventionalised. In Egypt
it conforms more or less exactly to the general stereotyping of life. We
may grant, with some emphatic qualifications, that in some cases "with
the tyrant _began_ the building of large temples, ... the patronage of
clever handicrafts, the promoting of all the arts,"[353] and that he may
have patronised men of letters; but as regards the temples it is certain
that in Hellas he was not the chief temple-builder; and it is also quite
certain that the tyrant never evolved a single generation of important
writers, thinkers, and artists, any more than of intelligent,
self-respecting, and self-governing citizens. The latter constituted, in
fact, the necessary nutritive soil for the former in the communities of
antiquity.[354] It has been said[355] that "at the end of the third
century of Rome, when its inhabitants had hardly escaped from the hands
of Porsena, Syracuse contained more men of high genius than any other
city in the world. These were collected at the court of the first Hiero,
during his short reign of ten years, and among them were the greatest
poets of the age: Pindar ... Simonides ... ®schylus." This is true; but
Hiero had not been the means of evolving the powers of any one of the
three. Pindar is manifestly the product of the diversified life of the
free States; Simonides, though much patronised by aristocrats, began to
"find himself" as a chorus teacher at Carthea in Ceos, won countless
prizes at the Greek festivals,[356] and spent only the latter part of
his life with Hiero; ®schylus is the product of the Attic theatre. Not
the tyranny, but democracy, had been the _alma mater_. It is true that
Athens after ®schylus played the "despot city" in finance, but she so
far preserved at home the democratic atmosphere, in which, according to
Demosthenes, slaves had more freedom of speech than citizens in many
other places.[357] Lesbos had her oscillations between oligarchy and
despotism; but the group in which Sappho stood was that of Pittakos and
Alkaios--the elected ten-years dictator who finally laid down his
dictatorship, and the fierce singer who assailed him. Not in the "Roman
peace" of a fixed despotism did Lesbian song reach its apex.

     The old problem of the culture-value of the tyrant has been raised
     afresh by Messrs. Mitchell and Caspari, in their abridgment of
     Grote's _History of Greece_. Grote's enthusiasm for democracy, they
     contend, "undoubtedly prevented him from doing full justice to much
     that was good in the non-democratic governments of Greece,"
     notably "in his estimate of the so-called 'tyrants' of the Greek
     world and in his attitude towards the Macedonian Empire" (pref. to
     work cited, p. xv). Part of their discussion is beside the case,
     and proves only their general hostility to Grote as "a
     rationalist," to whom "every problem was a matter for rational
     discussion" (p. xiii). They first assert that Grote's chapter
     heading, "Age of the Despots," is "subtly misleading," inasmuch as
     there were despots at various periods in Greek history--as has been
     insisted by Professor Mahaffy. Then they avow that "this fact is
     mentioned by Grote himself," and that he "quite properly
     distinguishes" between the early and the late tyrannies.

     The counter-claim is first put in the propositions (1) that an
     early Greek "tyranny" was in effect "a union of one powerful
     personality with the poorer and hitherto unrepresented classes,"
     favourable to individual life among the latter; and (2) that the
     tyrants by preserving peace and giving the people individual
     freedom of life promoted "the accumulation of wealth and the
     extension of trade at home and abroad, and enriched the Greek mind
     by familiarising it with the natural and artistic products of other
     lands" (p. xvii). There is really nothing here that Grote denied;
     nor do the critics attempt to show that he denies it. Grote
     actually said, before them, that "the demagogue despots are
     interesting as the first evidence of the growing importance of the
     people in political affairs. The demagogue stood forward as
     representing the feelings and interests of the people against the
     governing few.... Even the worst of the despots was more formidable
     to the rich than to the poor; and the latter may perhaps have
     gained by the change...." (_History_, pt. ii, ch. ix, ed. 1888, ii,
     397). As regards the case of Peisistratos, on which Messrs.
     Mitchell and Caspari chiefly found their plea, Grote notes that his
     "was doubtless practically milder" than the average despotism, but
     that "cases of this character were rare." And to _this_ thesis,
     which is backed by an overwhelming mass of Greek testimony, from
     Herodotus to Aristotle and Plato, the critics offer no kind of
     answer.

     They do, however, claim for "the tyrants" in general that "in the
     first place their orderly government provided _for the first time_
     the conditions which are essential to artistic and literary
     production. Secondly, it was their policy to foster in all possible
     ways everything that contributed to the magnificence of the
     States." If it be meant to include under the head of _tyrannoi_ the
     early feudal chieftains before whom the bards chanted, the issue is
     merely confused. If not, the proposition is untenable. If again it
     be argued that the Mausoleum was a finer thing than the Parthenon,
     or quite as well worth having, the real issue is missed.

     It is significant that Grote's anti-rationalistic critics make no
     attempt to gauge the respective effects of "tyrannic" and
     democratic or oligarchic rule on the _inner_ life of men, which is
     what Grote chiefly considered. Neither is this, the vital issue,
     once faced in the essay of Hegewisch "On the Epoch of Roman History
     most Fortunate for the Human Race" (French trans. by Solvet, 1834),
     or in the encomiums of Gibbon, Mommsen, and Renan, before cited (p.
     89, _note_). As has been shown above, there is no instance of a new
     and great intellectual development taking its rise or visibly going
     forward (save as at Alexandria under the Ptolemies) under the
     auspices of even a good despot in antiquity; though such a despot
     might at times usefully preserve the peace and cherish writers and
     artists. Here, then, is a sociological clue that should be
     followed. The reasonable inference seems to be that democratic
     conditions, other things being equal, tend most to elicit human
     faculty.

And where in modern times certain of the less democratic nations may be
said to have developed certain forms of culture more widely and
energetically than do certain of the more democratic States--as Germany
her learned class, in comparison with France and England and the United
States; or modern Russia in comparison with the States in the matter of
the higher fiction--it can easily be shown (1) that these developments
arise not in virtue of but in reaction against autocracy, and (2) that
they were possible only in virtue of the evocative influence of
communities living more freely. Modern communities differ vitally from
the ancient in that printing has created a species of intercourse which
overleaps all political and geographical restrictions, so that a
politically tyrannised community can yet receive and respond to the
stimulus of another. But the stimulus is still indispensable. Thus the
intellectual expansion of France after the death of Louis XIV[358] drew
germinally from the culture of the England of the day; and that of
Germany later in the century was equally a sequence from that and from
the ferment in France. Given the cluster of independent States, each
with its court and its university, which made up the Germany of the
period, the revived spirit of free thought bore the more and the better
fruit because of the multitude of the reactions involved in the
circumstances. For the time, the slackened and lightened petty
autocracies counted for intellectual democracy, though even Kant was
made to feel the pressure of censorship. It was not regal or ducal rule
that made Lessing or Herder or Schiller or Goethe; and it was not mere
kingly encouragement that bred scholars like Hermann and Wachsmuth and
Buttmann and Bekker and Boeckh and Heeren and Ottfried MŸller. The
school of TŸbingen was the outcome of a movement that proximately began
in English Deism; and even the personal bias of Frederick counted for
much less in the evolution than the general contagion of European
debate. In the University of Berlin, organised after Jena, the inspiring
principle was that of intellectual freedom; and the moving spirits took
express pains to guard against the tyranny of convention which they saw
ruling in the universities of England. For the rest, the production of a
very large class of scholarly specialists in Germany was made possible
primarily by the number of universities set up in the days of
separatism, and secondarily by the absence of such economic conditions
(all resting on possession of coal and maritime situation) as drew
English energy predominantly to industry and commerce. It is true that
if a democratic society to-day does not make express economic provision
for a scholarly and cultured class, it is likely to lack such, because
the leisured or idle class in all countries grows less capable of, and
less inclined to, such intellectual production as it contributed to the
serious literature of England during the nineteenth century. But such
economic provision has been still more necessary in monarchic
communities. Finally, at every stage Germany has been reacted upon by
France and England; and it is notable that while, in the last
generation, under a strengthening militarism and imperialism, the number
of trained German specialists was maintained, the number of Germans able
to stir and lead European thought fell off.[359]

In the same way the phenomenon of a group of great novelists in the
autocratic Russia of our own age is no fruit of autocracy, save in the
sense that autocratic government checks all other forms of criticism of
life, all liberal discussion, and so drives men back on artistic forms
of writing which offer no disturbing social doctrine. And the artistic
development itself is made possible only by the culture previously or
contemporaneously accumulated in other and freer communities, from whose
mental life the cultivated Russian draws his. It was to some extent a
similar restrictive pressure that specially developed the drama in
France under the Third Empire. Apart from the peculiar case of the
Italian cities of the Renaissance, discussed hereinafter, the most that
can be said for the "tyrant" in modern Europe is that Richelieu and
Colbert promoted science in France; that the German principalities of
the eighteenth century fostered music at their courts; that George III
did much for Handel in England; and that the King of Bavaria did still
more for Wagner. On the other hand, the system of national and municipal
theatres on the Continent was an essential adjunct even in this regard;
and the mere comparative freedom accorded to the drama in Elizabethan
England, at a time when surplus intellectual energy lacked other
stimuli, sufficed to develop that art in one generation to a degree
never so speedily reached elsewhere, save in republican Athens. Where
the "tyrant" is most useful is in such a civilisation as that of the
Saracens, for which autocracy is the only alternative to anarchy, and
where, on a basis of derived culture, he can protect and rapidly further
the useful arts and all manner of special studies. But even he cannot
command a great intellectual art, or an inwardly great literature.[360]
It will hardly be pretended that the freethinking which went on in
Moslem Persia and Spain in the eighth and later centuries was evoked by
the Caliphs, though some of them for a time protected it. The Ptolemies
for a while fostered science at Alexandria; but under Roman rule--surely
as tyrannous--it died out. And even under the Ptolemies science was a
hothouse plant which never throve in the open.

It is clear, then, that first the rule of Alexander and his successors,
and later the rule of Rome, over Greece and the Gr¾cised East, put a
check on the intellectual forces there, against which there was no
counteractive in existence. There remained no other free communities
whose culture could fecundate that of the Greek and other cities held in
tutelage.

     The city of Rhodes, which recovered its independence at the death
     of Alexander, and maintained its self-government down till the
     Roman period, was, in point of fact, latterly distinguished for its
     art (Mahaffy, _Greek Life and Thought_, pp. 334-38), thus
     illustrating afresh the value of free life as an art stimulus; but
     its pre-eminently commercial activity, as in the case of Corinth,
     and as later in the case of Venice, kept it relatively
     undistinguished in literature. Rich merchants commissioned pictures
     and statues, but not philosophies or books. Holm (Eng. trans. iv,
     492) calls Rhodes a _seat_ of philosophy, etc., naming Theophrastus
     and Eudemus. But they both studied and settled at Athens.

From the whole history there emerges the demonstration of what might
reasonably be put _a priori_--that for a whole community, once
self-governing, to acquiesce in an all-embracing foreign despotism meant
the settling of lethargy on half of its mental life.[361] What the
thinkers left in Greece _could_ do was to lend philosophic ideas and
method to the jurists at work on the problem of adapting Roman law to
the needs of a world-empire, and this was done to good purpose; but it
was the last genuine task that the circumstances permitted of. To
discuss vitally the problems of politics would have meant challenging
the despotism. There remained, it is true, philosophy and the arts; and
these were still cultivated; but they finally subsisted at the level of
the spirit of a community which felt itself degenerate from its past,
and so grew soon hopelessly imitative. No important work, broadly
speaking, can ever be done save by men who, like the most gifted Greeks
of the palmy days (innovating in drama and improving on the science of
the foreigner), feel themselves capable of equalling or transcending the
past;[362] and that feeling seems to have become impossible alike for
the students and the sculptors of Greece soon after the Macedonian
conquest, or at least after the Roman. Plato and Pheidias, Aristotle and
Praxiteles, ®schylus and Epicurus, figured as heights of irrecoverable
achievement; and the pupillary generations brooded dreamily over Plato
or drew serenity from Epicurus as their bent lay, and produced statues
of alien rulers, or of the deities of alien temples, where their
ancestors had portrayed heroes for the cities and Gods for the shrines
of Greece. Beneath the decadence of spirit there doubtless lay, not
physiological decay, as is sometimes loosely assumed, but a certain
arrest of psychological development--an arrest which, as above
suggested, may be held to have set in when the life and culture of the
"family women" in the Greek cities began decisively to conform to the
Asiatic standard, the men cultivating the mind, while the women were
concerned only with the passive life of the body. In this one matter of
the equal treatment of the sexes Sparta transcended the practice of
Athens, her narrow intellectual life being at least the same for both;
and to this element of equilibrium was probably due her long maintenance
of vigour at the level of her ideal.

     [As, however, the Spartan women, whatever their training, could not
     finally live the martial life of the men, the results of their
     chiefly animal training were not exemplary. See the question
     vivaciously discussed by De Pauw, _Recherches philosophiques sur
     les Grecs_, 1787, ptie. iv, sect. x, ¤ 1--a work which contains
     many acute observations, as well as a good many absurdities. The
     Spartan women, it appears, were in a special degree carried away by
     the Bacchic frenzy. Aelian, _Var. Hist._ iii, 42. Cp. Aristotle,
     _Politics_, ii, 9 (and other testimonies cited by Hermann, _Manual
     of the Political Antiquities of Greece_, ¤ 27, 12), as to their
     general licence.]

The arrested psychological development, it need hardly be added, would
tend to mean not merely unoriginal thinking among those who did think,
but finally a shrinkage of the small number of those who cared greatly
for thinking. Even in the independent period, the mental life of Greece
drew perforce from a relatively small class--chiefly the leisured middle
class and the exceptional artificers or slaves who, in a democratic
community, could win culture by proving their fitness for it. Under the
Roman rule the endowed scholars (sophists) and artists alike would tend
to minister to Roman taste, and as _that_ deteriorated its ministers
would. Rome, it is easy to see, went the downward intellectual way in
the imperial age with fatal certainty; and her subject States
necessarily did likewise at their relative distance. Finally, when
Christianity became the religion of the Empire, all the sciences and all
the fine arts save architecture and metal-work were rapidly stupefied,
the Emperor vetoing free discussion in the fifth century, and the Church
laying the dead hand of convention on all such art as it tolerated, even
as the priesthood of Egypt had done in their day. It is positively
startling to trace the decline of the fine arts after the second
century. On the arch of Constantine, at Rome, all the best sculpture is
an appropriation from the older arch of Trajan: under the first
Christian emperor there are no artists capable of decently embellishing
his monument in the ancient metropolis. All the forms of higher faculty
seem to have declined together; and as the decay proceeded the official
hostility to all forms of free thought strengthened.

     [See Finlay, _History of Greece_, as cited, i, 284-85, as to the
     veto on discussion by Theodosius. In the next century Justinian
     suppressed the philosophic schools at Athens. Finlay, in one
     passage (i, 221), speaks of them as nearly extinct before
     suppression; but elsewhere (pp. 277-81) he gives an entirely
     contrary account. There are too many such contradictions in his
     pages. Cp. Hertzberg, _Geschichte Griechenlands seit dem Absterben
     des antiken Lebens_, 1876, i, 78-84.]

By the time of Constantine, even the coinage had come to look like that
of a semi-barbarian State; and thought, of course, had already stagnated
when Christianity conquered the "educated" classes. But these classes
themselves were speedily narrowed nearly to those of the priests and the
bureaucracy, save in so far as commerce maintained some semi-leisure.
Barbarian invasion and imperial taxation combined in many districts to
exterminate the former leisured and property-owning class. It is indeed
an exaggeration to say that "the labourer and the artisan alone could
find bread ... and, with the extinction of the wealthy and educated
classes, the local prejudices of the lower orders became the law of
society."[363] But the last clause is broadly true. In this society the
priest, with his purely pietistic tastes and knowledge, became the type
and source of culture.

A cultured modern Greek apologist of the Byzantine Empire[364] has
anxiously sought to combine with the thesis that Christianity is a
civilising force, the unavoidable admission that Byzantine civilisation
was intellectually stationary for a thousand years. It is right that
every possible plea for that ill-famed civilisation should be carefully
attended to, even when it takes the form of reminding us[365] that after
all the sixth century produced Procopius and Agathias; the seventh,
George of Pisidia; the eighth, John of Damascus; the ninth, Photius; and
so on--one man or two per century who contrived to be remembered without
being annalised as emperor. Of rather more importance is the item that
Christian Constantinople at one point, following Egyptian and Roman
precedent, improved on the practice of heathen Athens, in that the women
of the imperial court and of the upper classes seem to have received a
fair share of what culture there was.[366] It is further a matter of
bare justice to note that Byzantium had all along to maintain itself
against the assaults of Persia, of Islam, of barbarism, heathen and
Christian, and of Latin Christendom. But there must all the same be made
the grieving admission that "We certainly do not find in the Byzantine
authors the same depth and originality which mark the ancient writers
whom they copied";[367] and that this imitation "was unhappily the
essential weakness of Byzantine literature." That is to say, the
intelligence of the Christian Empire, like that of the Greece of the
post-Macedonian and the Roman domination, looked back to pagan Athens as
to an irrecoverable greatness. In that case, if we are to assume
comparative equality of culture between the sexes, there is no escape
from the conclusion that Christianity was in itself a force of fixation
or paralysis, the subsequent counteraction of which in Europe was a
result of many causes--of any cause but the creed and lore itself. The
creed, in fact, was a specific cause of isolation, and so of
intellectual impoverishment. As was well said by Gibbon, the mental
paralysis of the Byzantines was "the natural effect of their solitary
and insulated state."[368] The one civilisation from which Byzantium
might latterly have profited--the Saracen--was made tabu by creed, which
was further the efficient cause of the sunderance of Byzantine and
Italian life.

Had the external conditions, indeed, permitted of the maintenance of the
earlier manifold Empire of Constantine, the mere conditions of social
diversity which prepared the countless strifes of speculative sects in
Egypt and Syria might have led to intellectual progress, were it only by
arousing in the more rational minds that aversion to the madness of all
the wrangling sects which we detect in Procopius.[369] The disputes of
the Christians were indeed the most absurd that had ever been carried on
in the Greek tongue; and in comparing the competing insanities it is
hard to imagine how from among themselves they could have evoked any
form of rational thought. But as in Northern Europe in a later age, so
in the Byzantine Empire, the insensate strifes of fanatics, after
exhausting and decimating themselves, might have bred in a saner
minority a conviction of the futility of all wars of creed--this if only
external peace could have been secured. But the attacks, first of Persia
and later of Islam, both determined religious enemies, with whom, on
Christian principles, there could be no fruitful intercourse, shore away
all the outlying and diversified provinces, leaving to Byzantium
finally only its central and most homogeneous section, where the power
of the organised Church, backed by a monarchy bent on spiritual as on
political unity, could easily withstand the slight forces of
intellectual variation that remained. The very misfortunes of the
Empire, connected as they were with so many destructive earthquakes and
pestilences,[370] would, on the familiar principle of Buckle, deepen the
hold of superstition on the general mind. On the other hand, the final
Christianising of the Bulgarian and Slav populations on the north, while
safeguarding the Empire there, yielded it only the inferior and
retarding culture-contact of a new pietistic barbarism, more childish in
thought than itself. We can see the fatality of the case when we
contemplate the great effort of Leo the Isaurian in the eighth century
to put down image-worship by the arm of the executive. No such effort
could avail against the mindless superstition of the ignorant mass,
rich[371] and poor, on whom the clerical majority relied for their
existence. A Moslem conqueror, with outside force to fall back upon,
might have succeeded; but Leo was only shaking the bough on which he
sat.[372] It seems clear that the Iconoclastic emperors were politically
as well as intellectually progressive in comparison with the orthodox
party. The worshipped images which they sought to suppress were
artistically worthless, and they aimed at an elevation of the people.
"If the Iconoclastic reformers had had their way, perhaps the history of
the agricultural classes would have been widely different. The abolition
of the principle which the first Christian emperors had adopted, of
nailing men to the clod, was part of the programme which was carried out
by the Iconoclastic emperors and reversed by their successors."[373]
Thus did it come about that Christian Byzantium found the rigid
intellectual equilibrium in which it outlasted, at a lower level of
mental life, the Caliphate which sought its destruction, but only to
fall finally before the more vigorous barbarism of the Turks.