



Chapter II

THE SARACENS


While Byzantine civilisation thus stagnated, the Saracen civilisation
for a time actually gained by contact with it, inasmuch as Byzantium
possessed, if it could not employ, the treasures of old Hellenic science
and philosophy. The fact that such a fructification of an alien
civilisation could take place while the transmitting community showed no
similar gain, is tolerably decisive as to _(a)_ the constrictive force
of religious systems under certain conditions, and _(b)_ the nullity of
the theory of race genius. Yet these very circumstances have been made
the ground of a preposterous impeachment of the "Semitic" character in
general, and of the Arab in particular.

Concerning no "race" save the Celtic has there been more unprofitable
theorising than over the Semitic. One continental specialist after
another[374] has explained Semitic "faculty" in terms of Semitic
experience, always to the effect that a nation has a genius for becoming
what it becomes, but only when it has become so, since what it does not
do it has, by implication, no faculty for doing.[375] The learned
Spiegel, for instance, in his work on the antiquities of Iran,
inexpensively accounts for the Jewish opposition to sculpture as a
matter of race taste,[376] without even asking how a practice to which
the race was averse had to be forbidden under heavy penalties, or why
the same course was held in Aryan Persia. Connecting sculpture with
architecture, he pronounces the Semites averse to that also; and as
regards the undeniable building tendencies of the Babylonians, he argues
that we know not "how far entirely alien models were imitated by the
Semites."[377] Only for music does he admit them to have any independent
inclination; and their lack of epos and drama as such is explained, not
by the virtual inclusion of their epopees and early dramatic writings in
their Sacred Books, and the later tabu on secular literature, but by
primordial lack of faculty for epos and drama. The vast development of
imaginative fiction in the _Arabian Nights_ is credited bodily to the
"Indo-Germanic" account, because it has Hindu affinities, and took place
in Persia; and, of course, the Semites are denied a mythology, as by M.
Renan, no question being raised as to what is redacted myth in the
Sacred Books. For the rest, "the Semite" is not fitted to shine in
science, being in all his branches "almost totally devoid of
intellectual curiosity," so that what philosophy and science he has are
not "his own"; and he is equally ill-fitted for politics, wherein,
having no political idea save that of the family, he oscillates between
"unlimited despotism and complete anarchy."[378] Apart from music, his
one special faculty is for religion.

Contemporary anti-Semitism may fairly be surmised to underlie in part
such performances in pseudo-sociology, which, taken by themselves, set
up a depressing suspicion that numbers of deeply learned specialists
contrive to spend a lifetime over studies in departments of the history
of civilisation without learning wherein the process of civilisation
consists. On Spiegel's method--which is that of Mommsen in dealing with
the early culture-history of Rome--the Germanic nations must be adjudged
to be naturally devoid of faculty for art, architecture, drama,
philosophy, science, law, and order, since they had none of those things
till they got them in the Middle Ages through the reviving civilisation
of the Mediterranean and France. And as the Greeks certainly received
their first impulse to philosophy and science through contact with the
survivals of the old Semitic civilisations in Ionia, they in turn must
be pronounced to have "neither a philosophy nor a science of their own";
while the Spartans were no less clearly devoid of all faculty for the
epic and the drama. It is the method of Moli¬ère's doctors, with their
_virtus dormitivus_ of opium, applied to sociology.

The method, nevertheless, is steadily popular, and is no less freely
applied to the phenomena of Arab retrogression than to those of
imperfect development in the Semitic life of antiquity, with some
edifying results as regards consistency. Says a French medical writer:--

     "There is no such thing as an original Arab medical science. Arab
     medical science was a slavish imitation from the Greek. And the
     same remark is true of all the sciences. The Arabs have never been
     inventors. They are enthusiasts, possessed with a passion for
     anything new, which renders their enthusiasm itself evanescent. And
     in consequence of this incapacity for perseverance, they soon
     forgot the lessons in medical science which they had once acquired
     from the Greeks, and have fallen back into a state of the most
     absolute ignorance."[379]

The method by which Arab defects are here demonstrated from the arrest
of Arab civilisation is a simple extension of that by which Spiegel
demonstrates the original deficiencies of the ancient Semites, and
Mommsen the incapacity of the Latins to do what they did not do. A
certain race or nation, having at one time attained a considerable
degree of civilisation, and afterwards lost it, is held to have thus
shown a collective incapacity for remembering what "it" or "they" had
learned. The "they" here is the correlative of M. Taine's "we"--a
pseud-entity, entirely self-determining and strictly homogeneous. The
racial misfortune is set down to a fault pervading the whole national
character or intellect, and peculiar to it in comparison with other
national characters. Conditions count for nothing; totality of inherited
character, acting _in vacuo_, is at once the summary and the judgment.
Anyone who has followed the present argument with any assent thus far
will at once grant the futility of such doctrine. "The Arabs" had
neither more nor less collective faculty of appreciation and oblivion
than any other equally homogeneous people at the same culture-stage. It
is quite true that they had not an "original medical science." But
neither have any other historical "they" ever had such. The Greeks
certainly had not. The beginnings of medical knowledge for all mankind
lay of necessity in the primeval lore of the savage; and the nations
which carried it furthest in antiquity were just those who learned what
others had to give, and improved upon it. The Greeks must have learned
from Asia, from Egypt,[380] from Phoenicia; and the Romans learned
from the Greeks. The Arabs, coming late into the sphere of the higher
civilisation, and crossing their stock in the East with those of Persia,
in the West with the already much-mixed stocks of Spain, passed quite as
rapidly as the Greeks had done from the stage of primitive thought in
all things to one of comparative rationality as regards medicine and
the exact sciences; and this not in virtue of any special "enthusiasm"
for new ideas, but by the normal way of gradual collection of
observations and reflection upon them, in communities kept alert by
variety of intercourse, and sufficiently free on the side of the
intellectual life. Such was the state of the Saracens in Persia and
Spain in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries; and their social
evolution before and after is all a matter of natural sequence, not
proceeding upon any peculiarity of collective character, but
representing the normal reactions of character at a given culture-stage
in special political circumstances.

What is peculiar to the Saracen civilisation is its sudden origin
(taking Islam as a history by itself)[381] under conditions reached
elsewhere only as climax in a long evolution. The rise of Islam has the
twofold aspect of a barbarian campaign of plunder and a crusade of
fanaticism; and though the prospect and the getting of plunder were
needed to ripen the fanaticism to full bloom,[382] the latter was
ultimately a part of the cementing force that turned a horde into a
community. The great facilitating conditions for both were the feeble
centralised system maintained by the Christianised Empire, and the
disintegrating force of Christianity as a sectarian ferment. In Egypt,
for instance, the hatred between rival schools of Christian metaphysic
secured for the Arabs an unresisted entrance into Alexandria.[383] It
needed only a few generations of contact with higher culture in a richer
environment to put the Saracens, as regards art and science, very much
on a level with the stagnating Byzantines; and where the latter,
possessed of their scientific and philosophical classics, but imprisoned
by their religion, made no intellectual progress whatever, the former,
on the same stimulus, progressed to a remarkable degree. There has been
much dispute as to the exact measure of their achievements; but three
things are clear: (1) that they carried the mathematics of astronomy
beyond the point at which it had been left by the Greeks; (2) that they
laid the foundations of chemistry; and(3) that they intelligently
carried on surgery and medicine when the Byzantines, having early in the
Christian period destroyed the Asklepions, which were in some degree
the schools of the medicine of antiquity, had sunk to the level of using
prayers and incantations and relics as their regular means of cure.
Curiously enough, too, the Saracens had the merit, claimed for the
Byzantines, of letting their women share rather freely in their culture
of all kinds.[384] What is more, the later Saracens of Spain, whatever
the measure of their own scientific progress, were without question a
great seminal force in the civilisation of Western Christendom, which
drew from them its beginnings in mathematics, philosophy, chemistry,
astronomy, and medicine, and to some extent even in literature[385] and
architecture,[386] to say nothing of the effect on the useful arts of
the contact of the Crusaders with the Saracens of the East.

     As to Arab medicine, see Withington, as cited, pp. 139, 170; and
     Sprengel, _History of Medicine_, French tr. vol. ii (1815), pp.
     262-64--a passage which contradicts Sprengel's previous
     disparagements. Compare p. 343. The _histoire particuli¬ère_ in this
     chapter (v of Sect. 6) generally countervails the hostile
     summaries. Sprengel proceeded on the prejudice (i, 215) that there
     was no "rational science" anywhere before the Greeks; as if there
     were not many irrational elements in the science not only of the
     Greeks but of the moderns. A much better qualified historian of
     Arab medicine, Dr. Lucien Leclerc, writes (_Histoire de la m≈Ωdecine
     arabe_, 1876, i, 462) that in the eleventh century "the medical
     productions [of the Arabs] continue to develop an independent
     aspect, and have already a certain stamp of originality. Already
     the Arabs feel themselves rich on their own footing. We see
     appearing certain writings not less remarkable for the novelty of
     the form than for the value of the substance." Again, Dr. Ernst von
     Meyer, the historian of chemistry, sums up (_Hist. of Chemistry_,
     M'Gowan's tr. 2nd ed. p. 28), that "the germs of chemical knowledge
     attained to a marvellous growth among the Arabians." It may be
     noted that there is record of a hospital in Bagdad at the beginning
     of the ninth century, and that there were many there in the tenth
     (Leclerc, i, 559).

     A rational argument is brought against Semitic "faculty" by Dr.
     Cunningham, it should be admitted, in the contention that the
     Phoenicians figured poorly as copyists of Greek art (_Western
     Civilisation_, p. 69, following Renan). But this argument entirely
     ignores the element of time that is needed to develop any art in
     any civilisation. The Phoenician civilisation was overthrown
     before it had time to assimilate Greek art developments, which
     themselves were the work of centuries even in a highly favourable
     set of conditions. N≈°ldeke, though less unscientific than Spiegel,
     partly follows him in insisting that Phoenician architecture
     copied Egyptian, and that the later Semites copied the Greek, as if
     the Greeks in turn had not had predecessors and guides. Starting
     with the fixed fallacy that the Semites were "one-sided," he
     reasons in a circle to the effect that their one-sidedness was
     "highly prejudicial to the development of science," while compelled
     to admit the importance of the work of the Babylonians in
     astronomy. (_Sketches from Eastern History_, Eng. tr. pp. 15-18.)

It is now current doctrine that "for nearly eight centuries, under her
Mohammedan rulers, Spain set to all Europe a shining example of a
civilised and enlightened State. Her fertile provinces, rendered doubly
prolific by the industry and engineering skill of her conquerors, bore
fruit an hundredfold. Cities innumerable sprang up in the rich valleys
of the Guadalquivir and the Guadiana.... Art, literature, and science
prospered as they prospered nowhere else in Europe. Students flocked
from France and Germany and England to drink from the fountain of
learning which flowed only in the cities of the Moors. The surgeons and
doctors of Andalusia were in the van of science; women were encouraged
to devote themselves to serious study; and the lady doctor was not
unknown among the people of Cordova. Mathematics, astronomy and botany,
history[?], philosophy and jurisprudence[?] were to be mastered in
Spain, and Spain alone. The practical work of the field, the scientific
methods of irrigation, the arts of fortification and shipbuilding, the
highest and most elaborate products of the loom, the graver and the
hammer, the potter's wheel and the mason's trowel, were brought to
perfection by the Spanish Moors."

     See Stanley Lane-Poole, _The Moors in Spain_, pref. It could be
     wished that Mr. Lane-Poole had given English readers, as he so well
     could, a study of Saracen civilisation, instead of a "Story of the
     Nation" on the old lines. For corroboration of the passage see
     Dozy, _Histoire des Musulmans d'Espagne_, 1861, iii, 109, 110;
     Prescott, _History of Ferdinand and Isabella_, Kirk's ed. 1889, pp.
     186-88, 192, 195-99; Draper, _Intellectual Development of Europe_,
     ed. 1875, ii, 30-53; Sismondi, _Historical View of the Literature
     of the South of Europe_, Eng. tr. i, 50-54, 64-68, 76-84, 89. Cp.
     Seignobos, _Histoire de la Civilisation au Moyen Age_, 3e ≈Ωd. pp.
     48-62; Gebhart, _Origines de la Renaissance en Italie_, 1879, pp.
     185-89; Bosworth Smith, _Mohammed and Mohammedanism_, 2nd ed. pp.
     217, 286; N≈°ldeke, as cited, p. 105; Bouterwek, as cited, i, 3;
     Baden-Powell, _History of Natural Philosophy_, 1834, pp. 94-104;
     U.R. Burke, _History of Spain_, Hume's ed. 1900, vol. i, ch. 16.

All this being so, the course of deciding that the Arabs retrogressed
because "they" were impatient and discontinuous is on a level with the
thesis that nature has a horror of a vacuum. The Arab civilisation was
arrested and anchylosed by forces which in other civilisations operated
in exactly the same modes. The first great trouble was the element of
perpetual domestic strife, which was uncured by the monarchic system,
since every succession was liable to dispute. Under such conditions just
government could not flourish; and Moslem taxation always tended to be
suicidally unscrupulous.[387] Disputes of succession, indeed, wrought
hardly more strife among the Saracens than has taken place among Greeks
and Romans, and Christians of all nations, down to modern times; even
the ecclesiastical and feudal doctrine of legitimacy, developed by the
Latin and Greek Churches, having failed to prevent dynastic wars in
Christendom. But the Saracens, neighboured everywhere by Christians who
bore them a twofold hostility, had peculiar need of union, and ran
special risks from dissension; and in Spain their disunion was their
ruin. At the same time their civilisation was strangled intellectually
by a force which, though actually in operation in Christendom also, was
there sufficiently countered by a saving condition which the Saracens
finally lacked. The force of constriction was the cult of the Sacred
Book; the counteracting force in Christendom was diversity and friction
of governments and cultures--a condition which passed out of the Saracen
equation.

How fatally restrictive the cult of the completed Sacred Book can be is
obvious in the history of Byzantium. It was in terms of the claims of
the Christian creed that the Eastern Emperors proscribed pagan
philosophy and science, reducing the life of the whole Eastern world as
far as possible to one rigid and unreasoned code. That the mental life
of Italy and France was relatively progressive even in the Middle Ages
was substantially due--(1) to Saracen stimulus, and (2) to the friction
and ferment set up by the diversity of life in the Italian republics,
and the Italian and French and German universities. Byzantium was in
comparison a China or an Egypt. The saving elements of political
diversity, culture competition, and culture contact have in later Europe
completed the frustration of the tendency of church, creed, and Bible
to destroy alike science and philosophy. In Islam, on the other hand,
the arresting force finally triumphed over the progressive because of
the social and political conditions. (1) The political field, though
stormy, finally lacked diversity in terms of the universality of the
monarchic principle, which was imposed by the military basis and bound
up with the creed: uniformity of ideal was thus furthered. (2) There was
practically no fresh culture contact possible after the assimilation of
the remains of Greek science and the stimulus of Jewish philosophy; for
medieval Christendom had no culture to give; and the more thoroughly the
Papacy and the Christian monarchy in Spain were organised, the more
hostile they grew to the Moors. (3) The economic stimulus among the
latter tended to be restricted more and more to the religious class,
till that class was able to suppress all independent mental activity.

The last is the salient circumstance. In any society, the special
cultivation of serious literature and the arts and sciences depends on
one or more of three conditions--(_a_) the existence of a cultured class
living on unearned incomes, as in ancient Athens, middle Rome, and
modern England and France; (_b_) public expenditure on art and culture,
as in ancient Athens, Renaissance Italy and modern France, and in the
German university system _par excellence_; or (_c_) the personal concern
of princes and other patrons to encourage ability. In the nature of the
case it was mainly on this last and most precarious stimulus that
Saracen culture depended. Taking it at its zenith, under such rulers as
Haroun Alraschid and El-Mamoun at Bagdad, and Abderrahman III and
Hakam II of Cordova, we find its advance always more or less dependent
on the bounty of the caliph; and even if, like Abderrahman and his
son Hakam, he founded all manner of public and free schools, it depended
on the bias of his successors rather than on public opinion or municipal
custom whether the movement should continue. Abderrahman's
achievement, seen even through Christian eyes, was so manifold as to
constitute him one of the great rulers of all history; but the task of
making Moorish civilisation permanent was one which no series of such
statesmen could have compassed. The natural course of progress would
have been through stable monarchy to constitutionalism. But Christian
barbarism, with its perpetual assault, kept the Saracens forever at the
stage of active militarism, which is the negation of constitutionalism;
and their very refinement was a political danger, no less than their
dynastic strifes.

On the other hand, the continuous stress of militarism was in ordinary
course much more favourable to fanaticism than to free thought; and to
fanaticism the Koran, like the Bible, was and is a perpetual stimulant.
It was as a militant faith that Islam maintained itself; and in such a
civilisation the Sacred Book, which claimed to be the highest of all
lore, and was all the while so easy a one, giving to ignorance and
conceit the consciousness of supreme knowledge without any mental
discipline whatever, was sure of abundant devotees.[388] In an
uninstructed community--and of course the mass of the Saracen population
was uninstructed[389]--the cult of the Sacred Book needs no special
endowment; it can always be depended on to secure revenues for itself,
even as may the medicine-man in an African tribe. To this day the
propagation of the Koran is subscribed for in Turkey as the Bible
Society is subscribed to among ourselves, ignorance earning thus the
felicity of prescribing for human welfare in the mass, and at the same
time propitiating Omnipotence, at the lowest possible outlay of study
and reflection. Enthusiasms which can thus flourish in the twentieth
century were of course abundant in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh;[390]
and thus we find that when a caliph was suspected by the pietists of
caring too little for their lore, he ran the risk of being rebelled
against with a speed and zeal in the ratio of their conviction of divine
knowledge. Islam, unlike the State churches of Greece, Rome, and
England, has democratic rootage in the practice of setting ordinary
laymen to recite the prayers and preach the sermons in the mosques: it,
in fact, resembles Methodism more than any of the established Christian
churches in respect of its blending of clerisy and laity. Such a system,
when thoroughly fanaticised, has enormous powers of turbulence; and in
Moorish Spain we find them early exercised. Abderrahman I, whose
policy of tolerance towards Jews and Christians transcended all previous
Christian practice, and thus won for his realm a great stimulus in the
way of variety of culture-elements and of industry, had kept the
religious class in due control; but his well-meaning son Hisham was
priest-ridden to the last degree; and when his successor Hakam showed an
indisposition to patronise pietists to the same extent they raised
revolt after revolt (806-815), all put down by massacre.

     Mr. Lane-Poole notes (p. 73) the interesting fact that the
     theologers were largely of Spanish stock, the natives having in
     general embraced Islam. Thus the fanaticism of the Berbers was
     reinforced by that of the older population, which, as Buckle
     showed, was made abnormally devout, not by inheritance of
     character, but by the constant effect of terrorising environment,
     in the form of earthquakes.

The elements of the situation remained fundamentally unchanged; and when
the Moorish military power began to feel more and more the pressure of
the strengthening Christian foe, it lay in the nature of the case that
the fanatical species should predominate. The rationalistic and
indifferent types would figure as the enemies of their race, very much
as such types would have done in Covenanting Scotland. At length, in the
eleventh century, the weakened Moorish princes had to call in the aid of
the fanatical Almoravides from Barbary; and these, with the full support
of the priesthood and the pious, established themselves at the head of
affairs, reducing everything as far as possible to the standards of the
eighth century.[391] And when the new barbarism in time grew corrupt, as
that of the Goths and Vandals had done in earlier ages, the "Unitarian"
Almohades in turn (twelfth century) overthrew the Almoravides in Spain
as they had already done in Africa, only to be themselves overthrown a
hundred years later by the Christians. Thereafter the curtailed Moorish
power, pent up in Southern Spain, reverted to the spirit of fanaticism
which national failure generates in religious minds; and from the
thirteenth century to the final overthrow at the end of the fifteenth
the intellectual life of Saracen Spain was but a long stagnation.

A civilisation driven back on superstition and fanaticism[392] thus gave
way to a revived barbarism, which itself, after a few centuries of
power, was arrested in its progress by the same order of forces, and has
ever since remained in the rear of European development. A remarkable
exception, indeed, is to be noted in the case of Ibn Khaldun
(1332-1406), who in the narrow world of Tunis attained to a grasp of the
science of history such as no Christian historian up to his time had
remotely approached.[393] Such an intellectual phenomenon sufficiently
disposes of the current formulas about the innate incapacities of "the
Semitic mind." But whether it were that he dared not say what he
thought of the fatal influence of the Sacred Book, or that on that side
he was really, as he is ostensibly, quite uncritical, Khaldun fails, in
his telling survey of Arab decadence, to set forth the decisive
condition of intellectual arrest; and his luminous impeachment of the
civilisation of his race failed to enlighten it.

In Persia the same forces wrought closely similar results. The Greek
stimulus, after working wonders in science and rational thought, failed
to sustain a society that could not politically evolve beyond despotism;
and economic evil and intellectual decay together undermined the empire
of the Caliphs,[394] till the Turks could overrun it as the Christians
did Moorish Spain; they themselves, however, adding no new culture
developments, because under them no new culture contacts were possible.

Of the Moslem civilisation as a whole, it must be said that on the
material side, in Spain and the East, it was such a success as had not
been attained under the Romans previously (though it was exceeded in
Egypt by the Lagids), and has not been reached in Christian Spain since
the fall of Boabdil. Economically, the Moorish regimen was sound and
stable in comparison with that of imperial Spain, which, like Rome,
merely set up a factitious civilisation on the basis of imported bullion
and provincial tribute, and decayed industrially while nominally growing
in empire and power. When the history of Spain from the seventeenth
century onward is compared with that of the Saracens up to their
overthrow, the nullity of explanations in terms of race qualities
becomes sufficiently plain--unless, indeed, it is argued that Moorish
blood is the secret of Spanish decadence. But that surmise too is folly.
Spanish decadence is a perfectly simple sociological sequence;[395] and
a Spanish renascence is not only conceivable, but likely, under
conditions of free science and free thought. Nor is it on the whole less
likely that the Arab stock will in time to come contribute afresh and
largely to civilisation. The one element which can finally distinguish
one race from another--acquired physiological adaptation to a given
climate--marks the Arab races as best fitted for the recovery of great
southern and eastern regions which, once enormously productive, have
since the fall of the Roman and Byzantine Empires been reduced to
sterility and poverty. The Greeks in their recovered fatherland, and the
French in Algeria, have not thus far been much more successful than the
Turks in developing material prosperity. If North Africa, Syria, and
Mesopotamia are again to be rich and fruitful lands, it must be in the
hands of an acclimatised race; and the Arab stocks are in this regard
among the most eligible.

But there is no reason why the Turks should not share in such a
renascence.[396] Their incivilisation is no more a matter of race
character than the decline of the Moors or the backwardness of the
Spaniards: it is the enforced result of the attitude of special enmity
taken up towards the Turkish intruders from the first by all their
Christian neighbours. By sheer force of outside pressure, co-operating
with the sinister sway of the Sacred Book, Turkey has been kept
fanatical, barbarous, uncultured, utterly militarist, and therefore
financially misgoverned. The moral inferiority of the long-oppressed
Christian peoples of the Levant, whose dishonesty was till lately
proverbial, was such as to strengthen the Moslem in the conceit of
superiority; while the need to maintain a relatively great military
force as against dangerous neighbours has been for him a check upon all
endowment of culture. To change all this, it needs that either force or
prudence should so modify the system of government as to give freer
course to industry and ideas; that the military system should be
restricted; and that European knowledge should be brought to bear on
education, till the fettering force of religion is frustrated, as in the
progressive countries of Christendom. For Turkey and Spain, for Moslems
and for Christians, the laws of progress and decadence are the same; and
if only the more fortunate peoples can learn to help instead of
hindering the backward, realising that every civilisation is
industrially and intellectually an aid to every other, the future course
of things may be blessedly different from that of the past. But the
closest students of the past will doubtless be as a rule slow to predict
such a transformation.[397]
