



CHAPTER I

THE BEGINNINGS


¤ 1

To understand aright the phenomenon of medieval Italian civilisation we
need first to realise that it was at bottom a fresh growth on the
culture roots of the cities of Romanised Italy. When the imperial centre
was shifted to the East, as already remarked, the people of Italy began
a fresh adaptation to their conditions; those of Rome, instead of
leading, standing most zealously to the old way of things. All the
barbarian irruptions did but harass and hinder the new development; they
finally counted for little in its upward course. There is a prevalent
hallucination, akin to others concerning the "Teutonic race," in the
shape of a belief that Italy was somehow "regenerated" by the "free
nations of the North." No accepted formula could well be further away
from the facts. If the political qualities of the "Teutonic race,"
whatever that may mean, are to be generalised on the facts of the
invasions of Italy by the Germanic tribes, from Theodoric to Frederick
Barbarossa, they must be summed up as consisting in a general incapacity
for progressive civilisation. The invaders were, in fact, too disparate
in their stage of evolution from that of the southern civilisation to be
capable of assimilating it and carrying it on. Living a life of strife
and plunder like the early Romans, they found in the disarmed Italians,
and in their rapidly degenerate predecessors of their own stock, an
easier prey than the Romans had ever known till they went to the East;
but in the qualities either of military or of civil organisation they
were conspicuously inferior to the Romans of the early Republic. Men of
the highest executive ability appeared from time to time among their
leaders; a circumstance of great interest and importance, as suggesting
that a percentage of genius occurs in all stages of human culture; but
the mass of the invaders was always signally devoid of the very
characteristics so romantically attributed to them by German, English,
and even French Teutophiles--to wit, the gifts of union, discipline,
order, and self-government. These elements of civilisation depend on the
functioning of the nerve centres, and are not to be evolved by mere
multiplication of animated flesh, which was the main constructive
process carried on in ancient Germania. Precisely because they were, as
Tacitus noted, the most homogeneous of the European races of that
era,[455] they were incapable of any rapid and durable social
development. It is only mixed races that can evolve or sustain a complex
civilisation.

"The Germans," as we historically trace them at the beginning of our
era, were barbarians (_i.e._, men between savagery and civilisation) in
the most rudimentary stage, making scanty beginnings in agriculture;
devoid of the useful arts, save those normally practised by savages;
given to drunkenness; chronically at war; and alternating at other times
between utter sloth and energetic hunting--the pursuit which best fitted
them for war. Because the peoples thus situated were in comparison with
the Romans "chaste" and monogamous--a common enough virtue in savage
life[456]--they are supposed by their admirers to have been excellent
material for a work of racial regeneration. Only in an indirect sense
does this hold good. As a new "cross" to the Italian stocks they may
indeed have made for beneficial variation; but by themselves they were
mere raw material, morally and psychologically. Their reputed virtue of
chastity disappeared as soon as the barbarians passed from a northern to
a southern climate,[457] their vices so speedily exceeding the measure
of paganism that even a degree of physiological degeneration soon set
in. Even in their own land, met by a fiercer barbarism than their own,
they collapsed miserably before the Huns. As regards the arts and
sciences, moral and physical, it is impossible to trace to the invaders
any share in the progress of Italy,[458] save in so far as they were
doubtless a serviceable cross with the older native stocks. To their own
stock, which had been relatively too homogeneous, the gain of crossing
was mixed. Aurelian had put the case with rude truth when he told a
bragging embassy of Goths that they knew neither the arts of war nor
those of peace;[459] and so long as the Empire in any section had
resources enough to levy and maintain trained armies, it was able to
destroy any combination of the Teutons. There was always generalship
enough for that, down till the days of Teutonic civilisation. Claudius
the Second routed their swarms as utterly as ever did Marius or C¾sar;
Stilicho annihilated Rodogast, and always out-generalled Alaric; Aetius,
after routing Franks, Burgundians, and Visigoths, overwhelmed the vast
host of Attila's Huns; and in a later age the single unsleeping brain of
Belisarius, scantily weaponed with men and money by a jealous sovereign,
could drive back from Rome in shame and ruin all the barbarian levy of
Wittich.[460]

     As against the "Teutonic" theory of Italian regeneration, a hearing
     may reasonably be claimed for the "Etruscan," thus set forth:--"The
     Etruscans were undoubtedly one of the most remarkable nations of
     antiquity--the great civilisers of Italy--and their influence not
     only extended over the whole of the ancient world but has affected
     every subsequent age.... That portion of the Peninsula where
     civilisation earliest flourished, whence infant Rome drew her first
     lessons, has in subsequent ages maintained its pre-eminence.... It
     was Etruria which produced Giotto, Brunelleschi, Fra Angelico, Luca
     Signorelli, Fra Bartolomeo, Michael Angelo, Hildebrand, 'the starry
     Galileo,' and such a noble band of painters, sculptors and
     architects as no other country of modern Europe can boast.
     Certainly no other region of Italy has produced such a galaxy of
     brilliant intellects.... Much may be owing to the natural
     superiority of the race, which, in spite of the revolutions of
     ages, remains essentially the same, and preserves a distinctive
     character." (G. Dennis, _The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria_, 3rd
     ed. 1883, Introd. vol. i, pp. cii-iv.) Assumption for assumption,
     this is as defensible as the others.

What happened in Italy after Odoaker was that, for sheer lack of unitary
government on the part of the invaders, the cities, which preserved the
seeds and norms of the old civilisation, gradually grew into new organic
life. Under the early Empire they had been disarmed and unwalled, to
make them incapable of revolt. Aurelian, stemming the barbarian tide,
began to wall them afresh; but, as we have seen, the withdrawal of the
seat of empire left Italy economically incapable of action on an
imperial scale; and the personal imbecility of such emperors as Honorius
filled up the cup of the humiliation of what once was Rome. But the
invaders on the whole did little better; and the material they brought
was more hopeless than what they found. The passage from full barbarism
to order and civilisation cannot conceivably be made in one generation
or one age. Athaulf, the able successor of Alaric, passed his competent
judgment on the matter in words which outweigh all the rhetoric of
modern romanticism: "He was wont to say that his warmest wish had at
first been to obliterate the Roman name, and to make one sole Gothic
empire, so that all that which had been Romania should be called Gothia,
and that he, Athaulf, should play the same part as did C¾sar Augustus.
But when by much experience he was convinced that the Goths were
incapable of obedience to laws, because of their unbridled barbarism,
and that the State without laws would cease to be a State, he had chosen
to seek glory in rebuilding its integrity and increasing the Roman power
by Gothic forces, so that posterity should at least regard him as the
restorer of the empire which he was unable to replace. Therefore he
strove to avoid war and to establish peace."[461]

It needed only command of the machinery of systematic government--if
indeed the same qualities had not been in full play long before--to
develop in the Teutons every species of evil that could be charged
against the Southerns. The fallacy of attributing the crimes of
Byzantium to the physiological degeneration of an "old" race is exposed
the moment we compare the record with the history of the Franks, as told
by Gregory of Tours. Christian writers continue to hold up Nero as a
typical product of decadent paganism, saying nothing of the Christian
Chilperic, "the Nero of France," or of his father, less ill-famed,
Clothaire, the slayer of children, the polygamist, the strictly orthodox
Churchman, "certain that Jesus Christ will remunerate us for all the
good we do" to his priests.[462] Odious women were as powerful in
Frankish courts as in Byzantine; and the tale of the end of Brunehild is
not to be matched in pagan annals. Savage treachery, perjury, parricide,
fratricide, filicide, assassination, massacre, debauchery, are if
possible more constant notes in the tale of the young barbarism, as told
by the admiring saint, than in that of the long-descended civilisation
of Constantinople; and the rank and file seem to have been worthy of the
heads.

     One note of Gibbon's, on "barbaric virtue," _ˆpropos_ of the
     character of Totila, has given one of his editors (Bohn ed. iv,
     505) the opportunity to assert that the "natural superiority" of
     the invaders was manifest wherever they came in contact with their
     civilised antagonists. As if Aurelian and Belisarius were not the
     moral equals of Totila. Yet in a previous note (ch. 38, ed. cited,
     iv, 181) on the Frankish history of Gregory of Tours, Gibbon had
     truly remarked that "it would not be easy, within the same
     historical space, to find more vice and less virtue." On that head
     Sismondi declares (_Histoire des Franais_, ed. 1821, i, 403-4;
     _Fall of the Roman Empire_, i, 263) that "there was not a
     Merovingian king that was not a father before the age of fifteen
     and decrepit at thirty." Dunham (_History of the Germanic Empire_,
     1834, i, 10) improves on this to the extent of asserting that
     "those abominable princes generally--such were their premature
     vices--died of old age before thirty." It is a fair surmise that,
     Clovis being a barbarian of great executive genius (cp. Guizot,
     _Essais sur l'histoire de France_, p. 43), his stock was specially
     liable to degeneration through indulgence. But Motley, whose
     Teutophile and Celtophobe declamation at times reaches nearly the
     lowest depth touched by his school, will have it (_Rise of the
     Dutch Republic_, ed. 1863, p. 12) that later "the Carlovingian
     _race_ had been exhausted by _producing a race_ of heroes." Any
     formula avails to support the dogma that "the German was loyal as
     the Celt was dissolute" (_id._ p. 6).

     It is perhaps arguable that the early Teuton had a moral code
     peculiar to himself. Sismondi (_Fall_, i, 246) remarks, concerning
     Clothaire's son Gontran, called by Gregory "the good king Gontran,"
     as compared with his brothers: "His morality indeed passed for
     good; he is only known to have had two wives and one mistress, and
     he repudiated the first before he married the second; his temper
     was, moreover, reputed to be a kindly one, for, with the exception
     of his wife's physician, who was hewn in pieces because he was
     unable to cure her; of his two brothers-in-law, whom he caused to
     be assassinated; and of his bastard brother, Gondebald, who was
     slain by treachery, no other act of cruelty is recorded of him than
     that he razed the town of Cominges to the ground and massacred all
     the inhabitants, men, women, and children." Sismondi has also
     appreciated (p. 205) what Gibbon has missed, the point of the
     letter of St. Avitus to Gondebald of Burgundy, who had killed his
     three brothers, exhorting him "to weep no longer with such
     ineffable piety the death of his brothers, since it was the good
     fortune of the kingdom which diminished the number of persons
     invested with royal authority, and preserved to the world such only
     as were necessary to rule it." Cp. Sismondi's _Hist. des Franais_,
     i, 173.

A great name, such as Theodoric's, tends to dazzle the eye that looks
on the history of the time; but the great name, on scrutiny, is seen to
stand for all the progress made in a generation. Theodoric, though he
would never learn to read,[463] had a civilised education as regards the
arts of government, and what was masterly in his rule may at least as
well be attributed to that as to his barbaric stock.[464] It is
important to note that in his reign, by reason of being forced to live
on her own products, Italy actually attains the capacity to export grain
after feeding herself[465]--a result to which the king's rule may
conceivably have contributed.[466] In any case, the able ruler
represents but a moment of order in an epic of anarchy.[467] After
Theodoric, four kings in turn are assassinated, each by his successor;
and the new monarchy begins to go the way of the old. What Belisarius
began Narses finished, turning to his ends the hatreds between the
Teutonic tribes. Narses gone, a fresh wave of barbarism flowed in under
Alboin the Longobard, who in due course was assassinated by his outraged
wife; and his successor was assassinated in turn. Yet again, the new
barbarism began to wear all the features of disorderly decay; and the
Longobard kingdom subsisted for over two hundred years, under twenty-one
kings, without decisively conquering Venetia, or the Romagna, or Rome,
or the Greek municipalities of the south.[468] Then came the Frankish
conquest, completed under Charlemagne, on the invitation of the Pope,
given because the Franks were good Athanasians and the Longobards
Arians. The great emperor did what a great man could to civilise his
barbarian empire; but instead of fitting it to subsist without him he
destroyed what self-governing power it had.[469] Soon after his death,
accordingly, the stone rolled downhill once more; and when Otto of
Saxony entered Rome in 951, Italy had undergone five hundred years of
Teutonic domination without owing to Teuton activity, save indirectly,
one step in civil progress.

It thus appears that, while barbaric imperialism has different aspects
from that of "civilisation," having a possible alterative virtue where
the conditions are in themselves stagnant, even then its work is at best
negative, and never truly constructive. Charlemagne's work, being one of
personal ambition, was in large part destructive even where it
ostensibly made for civilisation; and at his death the Germanic world
was as literally degenerate, in the sense of being enfeebled for
self-defence, as was the Roman world in the period of its imperial
decay.[470] It is true that, despite the political chaos which followed
on the disintegration of his system, there is henceforth no such
apparent continuity of decadence as had followed on the Merovingian
conquest,[471] and his period shows a new intellectual activity.[472]
But it is a fallacy to suppose that he created this activity, which is
traceable to many sources. At most, Charlemagne furthered general
civilisation by forcing new culture contacts in Central Europe[473], and
bringing capable men from other countries, notably Alcuin, but also many
from Ireland.[474] But these favourable conditions were not permanent;
there was no steady evolution; and we are left asking whether progress
might not have occurred in a higher degree had the emperor's work been
left unattempted.[475] In any case, it is long after his time that
civilisation is seen to make a steady recovery; and there is probably
justice in the verdict of Sismondi, that Otto, an administrator of no
less capacity than Charlemagne, did more for it than he.[476] Guizot,
while refusing to admit that the work of Charlemagne passed away, admits
Sismondi's proposition that in the tenth century civilised society in
Europe was dissolving in all directions.[477] The subsequent new life
came not of imperialism but of the loosening of empire, and not from the
Teuton world but from the Latin. It is from the new municipal
developments inferribly set up before and under Otto[478] that the fresh
growth derives.

Mommsen, in one of those primitively biassed anti-Celtic passages which
bar his pretensions to rank as a philosophic historian, declares of the
elusive Celt¾ of antiquity, in dogged disregard of the question (so
often put by German scholars and so often answered against him[479])
whether they were not Germans, that, "always occupied with combats and
heroic actions, they were scattered far and wide, from Ireland to Spain
and Asia Minor; but all their enterprises melted like snow in spring;
they created nowhere a great State, and developed no specific
civilisation."[480] The passage would be exactly as true if written of
the Teutons. Every tendency and quality which Mommsen in this
context[481] specifies as Celtic is strictly applicable to the race
supposed to be so different from the Celts. "Attachment to the natal
soil, so characteristic of the Italians and _Germans_, was foreign to
them.... Their political constitution was imperfect; not only was their
national unity feebly recognised,[482] as happens with all nations at
their outset, but the separate communities were lacking in unity of aim,
in solid control, in serious political sentiment, and in persistence.
The sole organisation of which they were capable was the military,[483]
in which the ties of discipline dispensed the individual from personal
efforts." "They preferred the pastoral life to agriculture." "Always we
find them ready to roam, or, in other words, to begin the march ...
following the profession of arms as a system of organised pillage"; and
so on. Such were in strict truth the peculiarities of the Germani, from
Tacitus to the Middle Ages; while, on the contrary, there is plenty of
evidence that not merely the Gauls but the Britons of C¾sar's day were
much better agriculturists than the Germani.[484]

In the early stage the Germani actually shifted their ground every
year;[485] and for every migration or crusade recorded of Celt¾, three
are recorded of Teutons. The successive swarms who conquered Italy
showed an almost invincible repugnance to the practice of agriculture;
in the mass they knew no law and no ideal save the military; they were
constantly at tribal war with each other, Frank with Longobard and Goth
with Burgundian; Ostrogoths and Gepid¾ fought on the side of Attila at
Chalons against Visigoths, Franks, Burgundians, and Saxons; they had no
idea of racial unity; and not one of their kingdoms ever went well for
two successive generations. The story of the Merovingians is one
nightmare of ferocious discord; that of the Suevi in Spain, and of the
Visigoths in Aquitaine, is mainly a memory of fratricide. As regards
organisation, the only Teutonic kings who ever made any headway were
those who, like Theodoric, had a civilised education, or, like the great
Charles and Louis the Second, eagerly learned all that Roman tradition
could teach them. The main stock were so incapable of political
combination that, after the deposition of the last incapable
Carlovingian (888), they could not arrest their anarchy even to resist
the Huns and Saracens. Their later conquests of Italy came to nothing;
and in the end, by the admission of Teutonic men of science,[486] there
is nothing to show, in all the southern lands they once conquered, that
they had ever been there. The supposed type has disappeared; the
language never imposed itself; the Vandal kingdom in Africa went down
like a house of cards before Belisarius;[487] the Teutondom of Spain was
swept away by the Moors, and it was finally the mixed population that
there effected the reconquest. No race had ever a fairer opportunity
than the Visigoths in Spain, with a rich land and an undivided monarchy.
"Yet after three centuries of undisputed enjoyment, their rule was
overthrown at once and for ever by a handful of marauders from Africa.
The Goth ... had been weighed in the balance and found wanting."[488] In
Spain, France, and Italy alike, the language remained Romance; "not a
word is to be found in the local nomenclature of Castile, nor yet of the
Asturias, to tell the tale of the Visigoth";[489] even in England, where
also the Teutonic peoples for six hundred years failed to attain either
progressive civilisation or political order, the Norman conquerors,
speaking a Romance language, vitally modified by it the vocabulary of
the conquered. So flagrant are the facts that Savigny and Eichhorn in
their day both gave the opinion that "the German nations have had to run
through their history with an ingrained tendency in their character
towards political dismemberment and social inequality." The contrary
theory was a later development.[490]

If, instead of seeking simply for the scientific truth, we sought to
meet Teutomania with Celtomania, we might argue that it was only where
there was a Celtic basis that civilisation prospered in the tracks of
the Roman Empire.[491] Mommsen, in the passage first above cited,
declares that the Celts, meaning the Cisalpine Galli, "loved to assemble
in towns and villages, which consequently grew and gained in importance
among the Celts sooner than in the rest of Italy"--this just after
alleging that they preferred pastoral life to agriculture, and just
before saying that they were always on the march. If the first statement
be true, it would seem to follow that the Celts laid the groundwork of
medieval Italian civilisation; for it was in the towns of what had been
Cisalpine Gaul that that civilisation flourished. Parts of Northern
Italy had in fact been comparatively unaffected by the process which
rooted out the peasantry in the South; and there was agriculture and
population in the valley of the Po when they had vanished from large
areas around and south of Rome.[492] It is certain that "Celtic"
Gaul--whence Charlemagne (semi-civilised by the old environment) wrought
hard, but almost in vain, to impose civilisation on Germany--reached
unity and civilisation in the Middle Ages, while Germany remained
divided and semi-barbaric; that Ireland preserved classical learning and
gave it back to the rest of Europe when it had well-nigh disappeared
thence;[493] that England was civilised only after the Norman Conquest;
and that Germany, utterly disrupted by the Reformation where France
regained unity, was so thrown back in development by her desperate
intestine strifes that only in the eighteenth century did she begin to
produce a modern literature. One of the most flagrant of modern fables
is that which credits to "Teutonic genius" the great order of church
architecture which arose in medieval and later France.[494] "That
sublime manifestation of 'poetry in stone' so strangely called Gothic
architecture is not only not Visigothic, but it was unknown in Spain for
four hundred years after the destruction of the Goths."[495] The Goth
was not a builder but a wrecker.

But if anything has been proved by the foregoing analyses, it is that
race theories are, for the most part, survivals of barbaric
pseudo-science; that culture stage and not race (save as regards the
need for mixture), conditions and not hereditary character, are the
clues to the development of all nations, "race" being a calculable
factor only where many thousands of years of given environments have
made a conspicuous similarity of type, setting up a disadvantageous
homogeneity. It was simply their prior and fuller contact with Greece
and Rome, and further their greater mixture of stocks, that civilised
the Galli so much earlier than the Germani. On the other hand, the
national failure in Spain and Italy of the Teutonic stocks, as such,
proves only that idle northern barbarians, imposing themselves as a
warrior caste on an industrious southern population, were (1) not good
material for industrial development, and (2) were probably at a
physiological disadvantage in the new climate. Southerners would
doubtless have failed similarly in Scandinavia.

     I know of no thorough investigation of the amalgamation of the
     stocks, or the absorption or disappearance of the northern. There
     is some reason to suppose that early in Rome's career of conquest
     there began in the capital a substitution of more southerly
     physiological types--eastern and Spanish--for those of the early
     Latins. But the Italians at all times seem to have undergone a
     climatic selection which adapted them to Italy, where the
     northerners, whether Celt or Teuton, were not so adapted. The
     supposed divergence of character between northern and southern
     Italians, insisted on by the former in our own time, certainly
     cannot be explained by any Teutonic intermixture; for the Teutons
     were settled in all parts of Italy, and nowhere does the
     traditional blond type remain. Exactly such differences, it should
     be remembered, are locally alleged as between Norwegians and Danes,
     northern and southern Germans, and northern and southern English.
     If there be any real generic and persistent difference of
     temperament (there is none in variety of moral bias and mental
     capacity) or of nervous energy, it is presumably to be traced to
     climate. Some aspects of the problem are discussed at length in
     _The Saxon and the Celt_, pt. i, ¤¤ 4, 5.


¤ 2

The new life of Italy, so to speak, came of the ultimate impotence of
the northern invaders for imperialism. Again and again, from the time of
Odoaker, we find signs of a growth of new life in the cities, now partly
thrown on their own resources; and it is only the too great stress of
the subsequent invasions that postpones their fuller growth for so many
centuries. It is to be remembered that these invasions wrought absolute
devastation where, even under Roman rule, there had been comparative
well-being. Thus the province of Illyria, between the Alps and the
Danube, whose outlying and exposed character made it unattractive to the
senatorial monopolists, was under the Empire well populated by a free
peasantry, who abundantly recruited the army.[496] In the successive
invasions this population was almost obliterated; and when Odoaker
conquered the Rugians, who then held the territory, he brought
multitudes of them into stricken Italy, to people and cultivate its
waste lands.[497] Theodoric, in turn, is held to have revived prosperity
after overthrowing Odoaker; and we have seen reason to believe that
after the loss of Africa even southern Italy perforce revived her
agriculture;[498] but early in Theodoric's reign (496) we find Pope
Gelasius declaring, doubtless with exaggeration, that in the provinces
of Aemilia and Tuscany human life was almost extinct; while Ambrose
writes that Bologna, Modena, Reggio, Piacenza, and the adjacent country
remained ruined and desolate.[499] After Theodoric, Belisarius, in a
struggle that exhausted central Italy, almost annihilated the Goths; and
under Narses, who finished the conquest, there was again some recovery,
the scattered remnants of the population congregating in the towns, so
that Milan and others made fresh headway,[500] though the country
remained in large part deserted.

This would seem to have been the turning-point in the long welter of
Italian history. The Longobard conquest under Alboin forced on the
process of driving the older inhabitants into the cities. The
Ostrogothic kings, while they unwalled the towns they captured, had
fortified Pavia, which was able to resist Alboin for four years, thus
giving the other towns their lesson; and as he advanced the natives fled
before him to Venice, to Genoa, to the cities of the Pentapolis, to
Pisa, to Rome, to Gaeta, to Naples, and to Amalfi.[501] Above all, the
cities of the coast, still adhering to the Greek Empire, and impregnable
from land, were now allowed to retain for their own defence the revenue
they had formerly paid to Constantinople; Naples won the right to elect
her own dukes; and Venice won the status of an equal ally of
Byzantium.[502] Thus once more there began to grow up, in tendency if
not in form and name, republics of civilised and industrious men, in the
teeth of barbarism and under the shadow of the name of empire.[503] Even
in the eighth and ninth centuries the free populations of Rome and
Ravenna were enrolled under the four heads of _clerici_, _optimates
militi¾_, the _milites_ or _exercitus_, and the _cives onesti_ or free
_populus_.[504] Beneath all were the great mass of unfree; but here at
least was a beginning of new municipal life. The Longobards had not, as
has been so often written, revived the spirit of liberty; conquest is
the negation of the reciprocity in which alone liberty subsists; but
they had driven other men into the conditions where the idea of liberty
could revive; and in so far as "Lombard" civilisation in the next two
hundred years distanced that of the Franks,[505] it was owing to the
revival of old industries in the towns and the reactions of the other
Italian cities, no less than to the renewed growth of rural population
and agriculture.

     Sismondi (_RŽpubliques_, i, 55, 402-5; _Fall_, i, 242) uses the
     conventional phrase as to the Longobards reviving the spirit of
     freedom, while actually showing its fallacy. In his _Short History
     of the Italian Republics_ (p. 13), he tells in the same breath that
     the invaders "introduced" several of their sentiments,
     "particularly the habit of independence and resistance to
     authority," and that in their conquests they considered the
     inhabitants "their property equally with the land." Dunham (_Europe
     in the Middle Ages_, 1835, i, 8) similarly speaks of the Longobards
     as "infusing a new spirit" into the "slavish minds of the
     Italians," and then proceeds (p. 9) to show that what happened was
     a flight of Italians from Longobard tyranny. He admits further (p.
     17) that the Longobard code of laws was "less favourable to social
     happiness than almost any other, the Visigothic, perhaps, alone
     excepted"; and (p. 19) that the Longobards, wherever they could,
     "destroyed the [free] municipal institutions by subjecting the
     cities to the jurisdiction of the great military feudatories, the
     true and only tyrants of the country." Gibbon decides that the
     Longobards possessed freedom to elect their sovereign, and sense to
     decline the frequent use of that dangerous privilege (ch. 45, Bohn
     ed. v, 125); but pronounces their government milder and better than
     that of the other new barbarian kingdoms (p. 127). Sismondi again
     (_Fall_, i, 259; so also Boulting in his recast of the
     _RŽpubliques_, p. 8) declares that their laws, for a barbarian
     people, were "wise and equal." The midway truth seems to be that
     the dukes or provincial rulers came to feel some identity of
     interest with their subjects. Later jurists called their laws
     _asininum jus, quoddam jus quod faciebant reges per se_ (Symonds,
     _Renaissance in Italy_, 2nd ed. i, 45).

     Prof. Butler, in his generally excellent history of _The Lombard
     Communes_, is unduly receptive of the old formula that "the
     _infusion of Teutonic blood_ had given new life to the Peninsula"
     (p. 37; also p. 38). His own narrative conflicts with the
     assertion; for he writes that the long isolation of such cities as
     Cremona in the midst of Teuton enemies "must have led to a
     rekindling of military and municipal spirit and the power of
     initiative" (p. 35). He notes, too, that the building up of a new
     and active "aristocracy" in the cities from plebeian elements was
     hateful to the Teuton, as represented by Otto of Freisingen in the
     time of Barbarossa (p. 48). And what had the Teutons to do with the
     making of Venice? And what of the similar movement in Spain,
     Africa, Illyria, and Gaul?

     If the foregoing criticism be valid, it must be further turned
     against the expressions of Bishop Stubbs concerning the effect of
     the Teutonic conquest in setting up the Romance literatures. "The
     breath of life of the new literatures," he writes (_Const. Hist._
     4th ed. i, 7), "was Germanic.... The poetry of the new nations is
     that of the leading race ... even in Italy it owes all its
     sweetness and light to the _freedom_ which has breathed from beyond
     the Alps." Here the thesis shifts unavowedly from "race" to
     "freedom," and all the while no data whatever are offered for
     generalisations which decide in a line some of the root problems of
     sociology. A laborious scholar can thus write as if in matters of
     total historic generalisation there were needed neither proof nor
     argument, while the most patient research is needed to settle a
     single detail of particular history.

     On the whole, it may be psychologically accurate to say that the
     invaders, by setting up a new caste of freemen where before all
     classes were alike subordinate to the imperial tyranny, created a
     variation in the direction of a new self-government, the spectacle
     of privilege stimulating the unprivileged to desire it. But any
     conquest whatever might do this; and it is a plain paralogism to
     conclude that where the subjugated people does _not_ react the
     fault is its own, while where it does the credit is to go to the
     conquerors. It does not seem to have occurred to anyone to reason
     that the Norman Conquest of England was as such the bringer of the
     liberty later achieved there. Yet, as regards the Teutonic
     invasions of Italy, the principle passes current on all sides; and
     Guizot endorses it in one lecture (_Hist. de la civ. en France_, i,
     7ime leon, _end_), though in the next he gives an objective
     account which practically discredits it.

     As regards the ideals of justice and freedom in general, the
     Teutonic laws, being framed not for a normal barbarian state but
     for a society of conquerors and conquered, were in some respects
     rather more iniquitous than the Roman. In particular the
     Ostrogothic laws of Theodoric and his son punish the crimes of the
     rich by fines, and put to death the poor for the same offences;
     while the degradation of the slave is in all the early Teutonic
     codes constantly insisted on. (Cp. Milman, _Hist. Lat. Chr._ 4th
     ed. ii, 36, and refs. Roman law also, however, differed in practice
     for rich and poor. Cp. Cassiodorus, l. ii, pp. 24, 25; iii, 20, 36;
     iv, 39; v, 14, and Finlay, ed. cited. i, 236.) Whether or not
     Gregory the Great, as has been asserted (Milman, as cited, p. 52),
     was the first to free slaves on the principle of human equality, he
     did not get the idea from the Teutons.

It took centuries, in any case, to develop the new upward tendency to a
decisive degree. The Frankish conquest, like others, disarmed and
unwalled the population as far as possible; and it seems to have been
only in the tenth century, when the Hungarians repeatedly raided
northern Italy (900-24), and the Saracens the southern coasts and the
isles, that a general permission was given to the towns to defend
themselves.[506] This time the balance of power lay with the defence;
and to the mere disorderliness of the barbarian rule on one hand may in
part be attributed the relative success of the cities of the later
Empire as compared with those of the earlier. Latin Rome had not only
disarmed its cities but accustomed them for centuries to ease and
idleness; and before a numerous foe, bent on conquest, they made no
resistance. Goths, Longobards, and Franks in turn sought to keep all but
their own strong places disarmed; but their system could not wholly
prevent the growth of a militant spirit in the industrial towns. On the
other hand, the Hungarians and Saracens were bent not on conquest but on
mere plunder, and were thus manageable foes. Had the Normans, say, come
at this time into Italy, they could have overrun the quasi-Teutonic
communities as easily as the Teutons had done the Romans or each other.
But the conditions being as they were, the swing was towards the
independence of the cities; at first under the headship of the bishops,
who in the period of collapse of the Carlovingian empire obtained part
of the authority previously wielded by counts.[507] At this stage the
bishop was by his position partly identified with the people, whom he
would on occasion champion against the counts. Thus a new conception of
social organisation was shaped by the pressures of the times; and when
Otto came in 951 the foundations of the republics were laid. The next
stage was the effacement of the authority of the counts within the
cities; the next an extension of the bishops' authority over the whole
diocese, which was as a rule the old Roman _civitas_ or county. Thus the
new municipalities came into being partly under the ¾gis of the Church.

     Hallam (_Middle Ages_, ch. iii, pt. i) describes Sismondi as
     stating that Otto "erected" the Lombard cities into municipal
     communities, and dissents from that view. But Sismondi
     (_RŽpubliques_, i, 95) expressly says that there are no charters,
     and that the municipal independence of the cities is to be inferred
     from their subsequent claims of prescription. As there is nothing
     to show for any regular government from the outside in the
     preceding period of turmoil, the inference that _some_
     self-government existed before and under Otto is really forced upon
     us. Ranke (_Latin and Teutonic Nations_, Eng. tr. p. 11) pronounces
     that the first _consuls_ of the Italian cities, chosen by
     themselves, appear at the date of the first Crusade, 1100. "Beyond
     all question, we meet with them first in Genoa on the occasion of
     an expedition to the Holy Land." (They appear again in 1117 at a
     meeting of reconciliation for all Lombardy at Milan. Prof. W.F.
     Butler, _The Communes of Lombardy_, 1906, pp. 76-77.) But this
     clearly does not exclude prior forms of self-government for
     domestic needs. Consuls of some kind are noted "in Fano and other
     places in 883; in Rome in 901; Orvieto, 975; Ravenna, 990; Ferrara,
     1015; Pisa and Genoa, 1100; Florence, 1101." Boulting-Sismondi, p.
     63. (This last date appears to be an error. The document hitherto
     dated 1102 belongs to 1182. Villari, _Two First Centuries of
     Florentine History_, Eng. tr. pp. 55, 84. But there is documentary
     evidence for Florentine consuls in 1136. _Id._ p. 115.) Hallam
     himself points out that in the years 1002-6 the annalists, in
     recording the wars of the cities, speak "of the people and not of
     their leaders, which is the true republican tone of history"; and
     notes that a contemporary chronicle shows the people of Pavia and
     Milan acting as independent states in 1047.

     This state of things would naturally arise when the emperor and the
     nobles lived in a state of mutual jealousy. Cp. Bryce, _Holy Roman
     Empire_, pp. 127-29, 139-40, 150, 176. Mr. Bryce does not attempt
     to clear up the dispute, but he recognises that the liberties of
     the cities would naturally "shoot up in the absence of the emperors
     and the feuds of the princes." And this is the view finally of
     Heinrich Leo: "Seit Otto bemerken wir eine auffallende Aenderung in
     der Politik der ganzen nšrdlichen Italiens" (_Geschichte von
     Italien_, 1829, i, 325; Bk. iv, Kap. i, ¤ 1). Leo points out that
     the granting of exemptions to the north Italian cities came from
     the Ottos. "It was not, however," he goes on, "as it has been
     supposed we must assume, the blending of Roman _citizenship_ (which
     in the Lombard cities had never existed[508] in the form of commune
     or municipality [_Gemeinde_]) with the Lombard and German, but the
     blending of the survivors and the labourers, mostly of Roman
     descent, with the almost entirely German-derived free _Gemeinde_,
     through which the exemptions were obtained, and which gave a new
     aspect to the Italian cities" (pp. 326-27).

     Similarly Karl Hegel, after noting the analogies between Roman
     _collegia_ and German gilds, decides that "the German gilds were of
     native (_einheimischen_) origin, the same needs setting up the same
     order of institutions." He adds that the Christian Church first
     evoked in the gilds a real brotherly feeling. (_StŠdte und Gilden
     der germanischen Všlker in Mittelalter_, 1891, Einleit. p. 10.) He
     admits, however, that the gilds, when first traced under
     Charlemagne, are forbidden under the name _Gildonia_, as
     oath-societies; and that they seem to have been unknown among the
     Franks (pp. 4, 6).


¤ 3

Almost concurrently with the new growth of political life in the cities,
rural life readjusted itself under a system concerning the merits of
which there has been as much dispute as concerning its origins--the
system of feudalism. Broadly speaking, that began in the relation
between the leaders of the Germanic invasion and their chief followers,
who, receiving lands as their share, or at another time as a reward,
were expected as a matter of course to back the king in time of war, and
in their turn ruled their lands and retainers on that principle. When
the principle of heredity was established as regarded the crown, it was
necessarily affirmed as regards land tenures; and soon it was applied
as a matter of course to nearly all the higher royal offices and
"benefices" in the Frankish empire,[509] which after Charlemagne became
the model for the Germanic and the French and English kingdoms. Thus
"the aristocratic system was in possession of society"; and the conflict
which inevitably arose between the feudal baronage and the monarchic
power served in time to aggrandise the cities, whose support was so
important to both sides.

     [See Stubbs, _Constitutional History of England_, 4th ed. i,
     273-74, _note_, for a sketch of the discussion as to the rise of
     feudalism. It has been obscured, especially among the later
     writers, by lack of regard for exact and consistent statement. Thus
     Bishop Stubbs endorses Waitz's dictum that "the gift of an estate
     by the king involved no _defined_ obligation of service"; going on
     to say (p. 275) that a king's _beneficium_ was received "with a
     _special undertaking_ to be faithful"; and again adding the
     footnote: "Not a _promise_ of _definite_ service, but a _pledge_ to
     _continue faithful in the conduct in consideration of which the
     reward is given_." Again, the bishop admits that by this condition
     the giver had a hold on the land, "through which he was able to
     enforce fidelity" (p. 275, _note_); yet goes on to say (p. 277)
     that homage and fealty "depended on conscience only for their
     fulfilment." Bishop Stubbs further remarks (i, 278) that there was
     a "_great difference in social results_ between French (= Frankish)
     and German feudalism," by reason of the prostrate state of the old
     Gallic population; going on however to add: "But the _result was
     the same_, feudal government, a graduated system of jurisdiction
     based on land tenure, in which every lord judged, taxed, and
     commanded the class next below him; in which abject slavery formed
     the lowest, and irresponsible tyranny the highest grade; in which
     private war, private coinage, private prisons, took the place of
     the imperial institutions of government." Of course the bishop has
     previously (p. 274, _note_) endorsed Waitz's view, that "_all_ the
     people were bound to be faithful to the king"; but the passage
     above cited seems to be his final generalisation.]

Whatever its social value, the feudal system is essentially a blend of
Roman and barbarian points of polity; and in France, the place of its
development, Gallic usage played a modifying part. It is dubiously
described as growing up "from two great sources--the _beneficium_ and
the practice of commendation"--the first consisting (_a_) in gifts of
land by the kings out of their own estates, and (_b_) in surrenders of
land to churches or powerful men, on condition that the surrenderer
holds it as tenant for rent or service; while commendation consisted in
becoming a vassal without any surrender of title. "The union of the
beneficiary tie with that of commendation completed the idea of feudal
obligation." The _beneficium_ again, "is partly of Roman, partly of
German origin," and "the reduction of a large Roman population,"
nominally freemen under the Roman system, "to dependence," placed it on
a common footing with the German semi-free cultivator, "and conduced to
the wide extension of the institution. Commendation, on the other hand,
may have had a Gallic or Celtic origin...." In one or other of these
developments, the German _comitatus_ or chief's war-band, originally so
different, "ultimately merged its existence." On the whole, then, the
Teutons followed Gallo-Roman leads.

     [See Stubbs, i, 275, 276; cp. p. 4; and Bryce, _Holy Roman Empire_,
     pp. 123-24. Under Otto, observes Mr. Bryce (p. 125), "the
     institutions of primitive Germany were almost all gone." Elsewhere
     Bishop Stubbs decides (p. 10) that "the essence of feudal law is
     custom," and again (p. 71), that "no creative genius can be
     expected among the rude leaders of the tribes of North Germany. The
     new life started at the point at which the old had been broken
     off." Then in the matter of the feudal system, "the old" must have
     been mainly the Gallo-Roman, for feudalism arose in Frankish Gaul,
     not in Germany. In an early passage (p. 3) Dr. Stubbs confuses
     matters by describing the government of France as "originally
     little more than a simple adaptation of the old German polity to
     the government of a conquered race," but proceeds to admit that
     "the Franks, gradually uniting in religion, blood, and language
     with the [Romanised] Gauls, retained and developed the idea of
     feudal subordination...." The rest of the sentence again introduces
     error. For a good general view of the evolution of feudalism see
     Prof. Abdy's _Lectures on Feudalism_, 1890, lect. v-vii.]

To pass a moral judgment on this system, either for or against, is to
invert the problem. It was simply the most stable, or rather the most
elastic arrangement possible in the species of society in which it
arose; and we are now concerned with it merely as a conditioning
influence in European civilisation. Hallam, severe towards all other
men's generalisations, lightly pronounces that "in the reciprocal
services of lord and vassal, there was ample scope for every magnanimous
and disinterested energy," and that "the heart of man, when placed in
circumstances which have a tendency to excite them, will seldom be
deficient in such sentiments." On the other hand he concedes that "the
bulk of the people, it is true, were degraded by servitude," though he
affirms that "this had no connection with the feudal tenures"; and he is
forced to decide that "the peace and good order of society were not
promoted by this system. Though private wars did not originate in the
feudal customs, it is impossible to doubt that they were perpetuated by
so convenient an institution, which indeed owed its universal
establishment to no other cause."[510] The latter judgment sufficiently
countervails the others; and the claim that feudalism was a school of
moral discipline, which gradually substituted good faith for bad, will
be endorsed by few students of the history of feudal times. A more
plausible plea is that of Sismondi, that the feudal nobles of Italy,
finding themselves resisted in the cities, which they had been wont to
regard as their property, and finding the need of retainers for the
defence of their castles, affranchised and protected their peasants as
they had never done before. There resulted, he believes, an extension of
agriculture which greatly increased the population in the tenth and
eleventh centuries.[511] This is partially provable, and it gives us the
standpoint most favourable to feudalism; which on the other hand is seen
in the main to have soon reached its constructive limits, and to have
promoted division no less than union.[512]

It is important here to realise how in the new civilisation, with its
new language, there subsisted simultaneously all of the forms of
spontaneous aggregation which had been evolved in the older Roman life.
The aristocratic families in their very nomenclature exhibited anew the
old evolution of the system of _gentes_, men being named "of the
Uberti," "of the Buondelmonti," and so on. At the same time the
industrial groups formed _their_ communities, as the _schol¾_ of workers
had done of old; and in the political history of Florence we see
constitution after constitution built out of political units so formed.
First came the primary patriotism of the family stock; then that of the
trade or industrial group; and only as a balance of these separate and
largely hostile interests did the City-State subsist. Thus the new
Italian civilisation was on its political side fundamentally and
organically atomistic, civic union being never a primary but always a
secondary adjustment among groups whose first loyalty was to the primary
fraternity. It was hard enough to evolve out of all this a common civic
interest: to rise yet higher was impossible to the men of that era. And
all the while the separate corporation of the Church, despite its inner
feuds, tended to seek its separate interest as against all others.

As regards Italy, then, the value of the imperial feudal system,
operating through the machinery of the bishoprics, was that it freed the
energies of the cities, where alone the higher civilisation could
germinate; but on the other hand it fostered in them a spirit of
localism and separatism[513] that was ultimately fatal. The old Roman
unity had been completely broken up by the invasions, by the strifes of
Goths and Byzantines, by the sheer need for individual defence; and the
empire, warring with the Papacy, fixed the tendency. Genoa, Pisa,
Florence, Milan, and the smaller cities alike felt and acted as
independent States, each against the other, forming occasional alliances
only as separate nations or kings might do. In the ever-changing
conflict of nobles, emperor, pope, cities, and bishops, all parties
alike developed the spirit of self-assertion,[514] and wrought for their
own special incorporation. At times prelates and cities combined against
nobles, as under Conrad the Salic (1035-39), who was forced to revise
the feudal law and free the remaining serfs; later, members of each
species sided with pope or emperor in the strifes of Hildebrandt and
Henry IV and their successors over the question of investitures, till
the general interest compelled a peace. During these ages of
inconclusive conflict the cities, thus far acting mainly in conjunction
with their bishops or archbishops, developed their militia; their
_caroccio_ or banner-bearing fighting-car; and their institution of
public election of consuls. Here the very name tells of the power of the
Roman tradition, as against the supposed capacity of the Teutonic races
for spontaneous free organisation and self-government--tells too of the
survival of a majority of Roman-speaking people even in the upper and
middle classes of the cities. We may readily grant, as against Savigny
and his disciples, that the Roman institution of the _curia_ had not
been preserved in the cities of Lombardy. There was no reason why it
should have been, even if the Longobard kings had been inclined to use
it as a means of extorting taxation; for in the last ages of the Empire
it had become detestable to the upper citizens themselves.

     [Savigny's proposition seems to be sufficiently confuted in a page
     or two by Leo, _Geschichte von Italien_, 1829, i, 82, 83. Karl
     Hegel later wrote a whole treatise to the same effect, _Geschichte
     der Stadtverfassung von Italien_, Leipzig, 1847. See also F. Morin,
     _Origines de la dŽmocratie_, 3e ed. 1865, pp. 34-35, 59, 94, 122,
     etc. Guizot uncritically followed Raynouard, who held with or
     anticipated Savigny. As to the general revolt against the _curia_,
     cp. Leo, i, 47, and Guizot, _Civilisation en France_, i, 52-63. As
     to the theory of a Roman basis for the early civic organisation of
     Saxon Britain, cp. Pearson, _History of England during the Early
     and Middle Ages_, 1867, i, 264; Scarth, _Roman Britain_, App. i;
     Stubbs, _Constitutional History of England_, 4th ed. i, 99; and
     Karl Hegel, _StŠdte und Gilden der germanischen Všlker im
     Mittelalter_, 1891, Einleit. pp. 10, 33, 34.]

But other Roman institutions remained even in the Lombard cities, in
respect of the organisation of trades and commerce;[515] and apart from
the Roman survivals at Ravenna,[516] the free cities of the coast, which
had remained nominally attached to Byzantium, had _their_ elective
institutions, not specially democratic, but sufficiently "free" to
incite the Lombard towns to similar procedure.[517] Venice in particular
was moulded from the first by Byzantine influences. "Industry, commerce,
economic methods, and financial institutions were affected as much as
manners, the arts, and even religious life. Greek was the language of
eastern trade, and served many Venetians as a second tongue."[518]
Venice and Genoa alike developed a national police on Byzantine lines,
prescribing the shape, construction, and manning of vessels[519] in the
very spirit of late imperial Rome. And the cities of the peninsula could
not but be similarly influenced. At all events it was in the train of
these earlier developments, and perhaps in some degree on stimulus from
papal Rome, that the new organic life of the Lombard and Tuscan cities
began to develop itself in the tenth and eleventh centuries. The first
seats of new commerce were in those cities to which, as we have seen,
numbers of the old Italian population had fled before the Gothic
invaders. Amalfi was such a seat even in the ninth century; and to its
merchants is credited the first traffic with the East in the Saracen
period, as well as the first employment of the mariner's compass in
navigation.[520] Next flourished Pisa, where also, perhaps, the ancient
commerce had never wholly died out;[521] then her successful rivals,
Genoa and Venice. And always commerce formed the basis of the revival.

Once begun, the new life was extraordinarily energetic on the industrial
and constructive side, the independence and rivalry of so many
communities securing for the time the maximum of effort. Already in the
seventh century, indeed, their industry stood for a new era in
history.[522] Where before even the men of the cities had gone clad in
skins after the manner of the barbarian conquerors, they now began to
weave for themselves woollen cloths like the civilised ancients.[523]
Soon the art of weaving the finer cloths, which had hitherto been
imported from Greece in so far as they were used at all, followed the
simpler craft of wool-weaving.[524] It was in these cities that
architecture may be said to have had its first general revival in
western Europe since the beginning of the decay of Rome. Walls, towers,
ports, quays, canals, municipal palaces, prisons, churches,
cathedrals--such were the first outward and visible signs of the new era
in Italian civilisation.[525] On these foundations were to follow the
literature and the art and science which began the civilisation of
modern Europe, the whole presided over and in part ordered and inspired
by the recovered use of the great system of ancient Roman law, which too
began to be redelivered to Europe early in the twelfth century from
Italian Bologna.

     [The public buildings of the eleventh century are to this day among
     the greatest in Italy. Cp. Sismondi with Testa, _History of the War
     of Frederick I against the Communes of Lombardy_, Eng. trans, p.
     101. Before the tenth century the houses were mostly of wood, and
     thatched with straw or shingles (Testa, p. 11). It seems highly
     probable that the great development of building in the eleventh
     century was due to the sense of a new lease of life which came upon
     Christendom when it was found that the world did not come to an
     end, as had been expected, with the year 1000. That expectation
     must have gone far to paralyse all activity towards the end of the
     tenth century.]

And whereas the common political path to independence had been
originally by way of the headship of the bishop as against the count,
that headship in turn disappears during the eleventh century without any
visible or general cataclysm. It would seem as if, when the obsessing
fear of the end of the world with which men entered the year 1000 had
passed away, the secular spirit recovered new life; and the intimate
tyranny of the feudal representative of the military monarch being no
longer a danger, the hand of the bishop was in turn thrown off. For a
time the combination of city and prelate was politically valid, as in
the case of Archbishop Aribert of Milan, under whose nominal rule the
civic _caroccio_ seems to have made its appearance; but even Aribert was
shelved before his death, in the course of a civil strife between the
people and the nobles. Thenceforward, for an age, the great Lombard city
practically ruled itself, the nobles being included in a compromise
brought about by Lanzone, who, himself a noble, had led the faction of
the burghers. Fresh strifes followed, in which the succeeding
archbishops bore part; but the virtual autonomy of the city
remained.[526]

A similar evolution took place throughout northern Italy, in a
sufficiently simple fashion. The bishops were still in large measure
elected by the people, and rival candidates for vacant sees were always
ready to outbid each other in surrendering political functions which
were becoming ever harder to fulfil.[527] Beyond this, the course of the
final stage of the emancipation of the cities is not traceable. "All
that we can say is that at the opening of the eleventh century the
bishops exercised in the cities the authority which had formerly been
vested in the counts: at the close the cities have reduced the prelates
to insignificance, and stand before us as so many free republics."[528]
"The power of the bishops was the calyx which for a certain time had
kept the flower of Italian life close-packed within the bud. Then the
calyx weakened and opened, and Italian civic life unfolded itself to the
eye to form and bear fruit."[529]

To this, however, we should add that in Florence the process was
somewhat different. Under the Franks, Florence was ruled, like other
cities, by a count, who replaced the Longobard duke; and under the later
Germanic empire all Tuscany, and some further territory, is found ruled
by a Marquis, or Markgraf, Ugo, in the tenth century. In the latter part
of the tenth century his descendant Matilda sided with Hildebrandt
against the Emperor. At this period Florence was a centre of the papal
movement of monastic reform; and the people actually rose against a
simoniacal bishop, whom they fought for five years[530] (1063-68). Here,
under the rule of Countess Matilda, the republic or "commune" is seen
growing up rather of its own faculty than by help of the bishop; it
already calls itself _Populus Florentinus_;[531] and after Matilda's
death in 1115, it speedily develops the self-governing functions which
it had partially exercised in her lifetime.[532] And Florence, be it
noted, was the most democratic in population of the northern cities from
the beginning.[533]

In no case, however, should we be right in supposing that "republic" or
"commune" or "free city" meant a population united in devotion to a
civic ideal. The eternal impulses of strife and repulsion had in no
degree been eliminated by the formation of new State units. In Florence
we find all the elements of Greek _stasis_ at work in the first century
of the commune.[534] Among the _grandi_ were men who had risen from the
people, and men descended from old feudal houses; and these
spontaneously ranged themselves in factions. Such a division furthered
imperialism by inclining groups to take the side of the emperor, who,
wherever he could, set up his _Podestˆ_ (_potestas_ or "authority") in
the cities.[535] Imperialistic nobles further formed groups called
"Societies of the Towers," each of which had its common defensive tower
or fort, communicating with the houses of neighbouring members; the
officials of these societies were at times called consuls; and from
these were usually chosen, in the early days, the consuls of the
commune.[536] At times they were also consuls of trade guilds, a state
of things proving a certain amount of assimilation between the trading
and the noble class, who together formed the enfranchised "people," the
town artisans and the rural cultivators of the surrounding _contado_ or
"county" being excluded.

The close community thus formed exhibited very much the same political
tendencies as had marked that of early republican Rome. The cities,
constantly flouted and menaced by the castled nobility of the
surrounding territory, who blackmailed passing traders, soon learned to
use the iron hand as against these, who in turn sought the emperor's
protection; and cities wont to put down nobles were prompt to seek to
coerce each other. On the death of the Emperor Frederick I (1197),
Florence set on foot a League of the Tuscan cities, which, while
primarily hostile to the Empire, repelled the claim of the Papacy to
over-lordship as heir of the Countess Matilda. On such a basis there
might conceivably have arisen a new and strong national life; but soon
Florence, like old Athens, was oppressing her allies, who gave their
sympathy to a town like Semifonte, the refuge of all who fled from
places conquered and taxed by her. To individual allies like Sienna,
Florence was substantially faithless, and so strengthened from the first
the fatal tendency to separatism--this while the inner social sunderance
was steadily deepening.[537]

None of the forces at work was remedial on this side; the regimen of the
_Podestˆ_, even when he was actually a foreigner, furthered instead of
checking strife between communities;[538] and the more "aristocratic"
cities were at least as quarrelsome as the less. Bologna played the
tyrant city as vigorously as Florence.[539] Rome was among the worst
governed of all. In the thirteenth century, under Innocent IV, we find
the fighting factions of the nobles using the Coliseum and other ancient
monuments as fortresses, garrisoned by bandits in their pay, who
pillaged traders and passengers; and not the Papacy, but the "senator"
chosen by the people--a Bolognese noble--put them down, hanging nobles
and bandits alike.[540]

Such was civilisation at the centre of Christendom after a thousand
years of Christianity. The notable fact is that through all this wild
play of primitive passion there _was_ yet growing up a new Italian
civilisation; and it is part of our task to trace its causation.