CHAPTER I

THE SUBJECT MATTER


¤ 1

Politics, in its most general and fundamental character, is the strife
of wills on the ground of social action. As international politics is
the sum of the strifes and compromises of States, so home politics is
the sum of the strifes and compromises of classes, interests, factions,
sects, theorists, in all countries and in all ages. In studying it,
then, we study the evolution of an aggregate, a quasi-organism, in terms
of the clashing forces of its units and of their spontaneous
combinations.

This may seem too obvious and simple a truth to need formal telling; and
yet no truth is more often missed or set aside by writers who deal with
political history. The past course of nations, when it is sought to be
explained at all, is by two writers out of three accounted for by
certain supposed qualities of character in the given nation as a whole,
instead of by the specially conditioned play of forces common to all
peoples.[1] For instance, M. Taine, in the preface to the first volume
of his fascinating work, _Les origines de la France contemporaine_, goes
about to justify his own political indifferentism by stating that in
eighty years his country had thirteen times changed its constitution.
"_We_," he says, have done this; and "_we_ have not yet found that which
suits _us_."[2] It is here implied that a body of men collectively and
concurrently seeking for a fixed constitution have failed, and that the
failure is discreditable--that those who thus seek and fail have been
badly employed. It is by implication denied that successive changes of a
constitution may fitly be regarded as a process of growth and healthy
adjustment of parts: the ideal of political health is assumed to be a
state of fixity. Thus does indifferentism, naturally if not necessarily,
miss the point of view from which itself is to be studied as one of the
forces whose conflict the true historian ought to analyse.

There is no national "we" aiming collectively at a fixed and final
constitution; nor are the successive constitutions of France as such
more significant of failure or permanent harm than the successive
changes in the professedly unchanged constitution of Great Britain,
though the violent kinds of change are as such harmful. If M. Taine had
but applied with rigour the logic he once before prescribed, soundly if
wittily, for all problems alike, he could not have begun his history
with that delusive abstraction of a one-minded community, failing to
achieve "their" or "its" purpose. "_Je n'en sais rien_," he remarks with
a shrug, over the protest of M. Royer-Collard that certain scientific
reasoning will make Frenchmen revolutionary; "_est-ce qu'il y a des
Franais?_"[3] In dead earnest he now assumes that France consists just
of the single species "Frenchmen," whose constitution-building is a
corporate attempt to build a French house to live in; when all that is
truly historical in his own book goes to show clearly enough that French
constitutions, like all others, are products of ever-varying and
conflicting passions and interests of sets of people in France who are
"Frenchmen" merely when they happen to act in concert against other
geographical groups. At no moment were all of the French people
consenting parties to any one of the thirteen constitutions. Then there
was no collective failure.

Of course M. Taine knew this well enough in his capacity of narrator;
but as teacher he could not escape from the rut dug for his thought by
his fatalism. He must needs make the synthetic abstraction of "we,"
which excludes the political analysis essential to any practical
explanation; and it inevitably followed that his generalisations were
merely pseudo-biological, and not what is most wanted in
history--sociological truth rooted in psychology and biology. In
denuding himself alike of hopes and fears, M. Taine really gave the
great illustration of the truth of his own penetrating comment on
MŽrimŽe,[4] that he who will be duped by nothing ends in being the dupe
of his distrust. He will not be duped by this ideal or that; he will not
care enough for any to have a strong wish to see it realised; and so he
comes to be duped by the wish to disprove all, to work down all
sociology to the plane of cynical pseudo-biology. The enthusiastic
amateur can show it, can convict the critic of hearing only the devil's
advocate in every moral process,[5] and of becoming at length the
historic oracle of those, of all readers, who are most alien to his
philosophy.

Such an outcome, in the work of such a critic, is vividly instructive.
At worst, indeed, he has a positive value as the extremest reactionist
against the merely partisan method of history, which is almost all we
have had in England since the French Revolution, down to the other day.
After M. Taine has passed, fools' paradises must needs fall in market
value. But when the devil's advocate has made his round, we must still
plough and eat, and the paradises must just be laid out for new sowing.
The evil of theoretical extremes is not so much their falsehood as their
irrelevance. If we are to instruct each other in conduct, it must be in
terms of sympathies and antipathies; and if we are to profit by a study
of politicians, who are among the most generally typical of men, and of
politics, which is the expression of so much of life, we must go about
it as humanists and not as fatalists.


¤ 2

Humanity, however, will not suffice to save us from false philosophy if,
as humanists, we seek to gain our polemical ends by M. Taine's didactic
methods. He, naturally so much of an analyst, took to pseudo-synthesis
when he wished with little labour to discredit certain popular
aspirations. But pseudo-synthesis is the favourite expository process of
many men with ardent aspirations, and of many writers who are friendly
enough to the aspirations of their fellows. By pseudo-synthesis I mean
that process, above exemplified, of "cooking" an intricate moral problem
by setting up one or more imaginary entities, to whose volition or
potency the result is attributed. It was the method of medieval science;
and it is still popular among the experts as well as the amateurs of
historical science. It was the ordinary expedient of Comte, in whose
pages history becomes a Jonsonian masque of personified abstractions;
and Buckle too often resorts to it. But hear a learned and judicious
English Liberal, not to be suspected of doctrinary extravagance:--

     "As in time past Rome had sacrificed domestic freedom that she
     might be the mistress of others, so now" [in the later Empire] "to
     be universal she, the conqueror, had descended to the level of the
     conquered" [in respect of Caracalla's edict giving to all subjects
     of the Empire the rights of Roman citizenship]. "But the sacrifice
     had not wanted its reward. From her came the laws and the language
     that had overspread the world; at her feet the nations laid the
     offerings of their labour; she was the head of the Empire and of
     civilisation."[6]

The "she" of this passage I take to be as purely imaginary an entity as
Phlogiston; and it is not easy to see how a method of explanation which
in physical science is found worse than barren can give any edification
in the study of history. To say nothing of the familiar explanation that
Caracalla's sole motive in conferring the citizenship on the provincials
was the desire to lay on them corresponding taxes,[7] the proposition
has no footing in political actualities. "Rome's self-abnegation that
she might Romanise the world"[8] expresses no fact in Roman volition,
thought, or deed; it is not the mention of a sentiment which swayed
men's action, but the attempt to reduce a medley of actions to the
semblance of a joint volition. There was no "Rome" capable of
"self-abnegation" and susceptible of "reward." Why, then, should it be
said? It is said either because the writer permits himself to fill in a
perspective with a kind of pigment which he would not employ in his
foreground, or because he is still too much under the sway of old
methods when he is generalising conventional knowledge instead of
analytically reaching new.[9] Either way the lapse is only too
intelligible. And if an innovating expert, dealing with old facts, runs
such risks, great must be those run by plain people when they seek to
attain a generalised knowledge of facts which are the battle-ground of
current ideals. Only by perpetual analysis can we hope partly to escape
the snare of the pseudo-synthetic, the traps of rhetoric and exegetic
fiction.


¤ 3

The term "pseudo-synthesis" implies, of course, that there may be a true
synthesis. What is necessary to such synthesis is that there shall have
been a preliminary analysis; but a synthesis once justly made is the
greatest of helps to new analyses. Now there is one such which may
safely be brought to bear on the study of practical politics, because it
is an axiom alike of inorganic physics and of biology, and a commonplace
of human science, though seldom used as a means of historic
generalisation. This is the simple principle that all energy divides
ostensibly into forces of attraction and of repulsion.

     [The principle thus stated should be compared with the theorem of
     Kant as to the correlative forces of sociability and unsociability
     (_Idee zu einer allgemein Geschichte_), and the important and
     luminous formula of Professor Giddings, that all sociological
     processes, properly so called, turn upon "consciousness of kind"
     (_Principles of Sociology_, 1896, 3rd ed. pp. 17-19, and Preface;
     and in earlier writings by Professor Giddings, there mentioned).
     The scientific value of that formula is obvious; but other ways of
     stating the case may still serve a purpose. The view in the text I
     find to have been partly anticipated by Shaftesbury, _Essay on the
     Freedom of Wit and Humour_, 1709, pt. iii, ¤ 2 (_Characteristics_,
     ed. 1733, i, pp. 111-12), who is followed by Eusbe Salverte, _De
     la Civilisation depuis les premiers Temps historiques_, 1813, p.
     53. Shaftesbury even anticipates in part the formula of Professor
     Giddings in the passage: "If anything be natural, in any Creature
     or any Kind, 'tis that which is preservative of the Kind itself,"
     and in the sequel. As Professor Giddings traces (pref. to 3rd ed.
     p. x) the first suggestion of his "consciousness of kind" to Adam
     Smith's _Theory of the Moral Sentiments_, which is certainly in
     the line of descent from Shaftesbury, there may really be a causal
     connection.]

That principle obviously holds of the relations of men in society as it
does of their muscular action and of their moral and intellectual life;
and so fundamental is the fact that when we study human history in view
of it, we find it more and more difficult to suppose that it will ever
cease to hold. That is to say, it is almost impossible to conceive state
of life in which the forces of attraction and repulsion shall not
operate energetically in the moral and intellectual relations of human
beings. From the primitive and the barbaric stages in which the sight of
an alien moves the savage to such destructive rage as is seen in some
dogs at the sight of others, or in which a difference of personal odour
rouses a no less spontaneous repulsion--as in Chinese against Europeans,
or in Europeans against Chinese[10]--down to the fierce battle in
self-governing countries over every innovating law, or that strife of
opinion in which these lines play their part, the clash of opposing
tendencies is perpetual, ubiquitous, inevitable. And so difficult is it
to conceive any cessation that at once many observers leap from the
general principle to the particular conclusion that all the _modes_ in
which the action and reaction, the attractions and repulsions of
individuals and groups, have operated in the past must needs operate in
the future. They conclude, that is, that the particular phenomenon of
WAR, above all, is chronic, and can never definitely disappear. Thus M.
Zola, looking around him and finding strife everywhere, decides that all
the past _forms_ of strife are inevitably recurrent.[11] It may be well
at the outset to insist that the general principle involves no such
particular necessity.

War is simply a form in which the instincts of attraction and repulsion
have operated in human societies during ages in which certain
psychological and physiological types have been normal. It may very well
recur, with growing infrequency, for a long time to come; but it is not
rationally to be regarded as a necessary function of the grand
biological forces. What does seem certain is a different thing--that the
forces of attraction and repulsion will always operate in _some_ form;
and that the very fact of their finding less expression in the mode of
physical strife will imply their coming into play in other modes, such
as the strife of ideals, doctrines, and class interests as they are
expressed in politics without bloodshed. The general law is that the
forces of attraction and repulsion, as exhibited in human thought or
feeling, run during the earlier stages of growth in channels which may
be broadly regarded as animal; and that when altered political and
social conditions partly or wholly close these channels, the biological
forces open for themselves new ones.

War is precisely the blindest, the least rational, the least human of
all the forms of human conflict, inasmuch as it is the collective
clashing of communities whose members, divided among themselves by many
real differences of interest, bias, and attraction, are set against each
other, as wholes--if by anything higher than animal pugnacity--either by
the mere ideals or appetites of rulers or leaders, or by more or less
imaginary differences of interest, seen under the moral illusion of the
most primitive of social instincts--the _sensus gregis_. As evolution
proceeds, the blind form may be expected to disappear, and the more
reasoned forms--that is, the inter-social and intellectual--to develop.
