


Chapter II

THE SOCIAL AND POLITICAL EVOLUTION


¤ 1

In the twelfth century, then, we find in the full flush of life a number
of prosperous Italian republics or "communes," closely resembling in
many respects the City-States of ancient Greece. The salient differences
were (1) the Christian Church, with its wealth[541] and its elaborate
organisation; (2) the pretensions of the Empire; and (3) the presence of
feudal nobles, some of whom were first imposed by the German emperors on
the cities, and who, after their exodus and their life as
castle-holders, had in nearly every case compromised with the citizens,
spending some months of every year in their town palaces by stipulation
of the citizens themselves. All of these differentia counted for the
worse to Italy, in comparison with Hellas, as aggravations of the uncured
evil of internal strife. The source of their strength--separateness and
the need to struggle--was at the same time the source of their bane; for
at no time do we find the Italian republics contemplating durable peace
even as an ideal, or regarding political union as aught save a temporary
expedient of the state of war.

On the familiar assumption of "race character" we should accordingly
proceed to decide that the Italians, by getting mixed with the Teutons,
had lost the "instinct of union" which built up Rome. Those who credit
"Teutonic blood" with the revival never think of saddling it with the
later ruinous strifes of cities and parties, or with the vices of the
"Italian character." The rational explanation is, of course, that there
was now neither a sufficient preponderance of strength in any one State
to admit of its unifying Italy by conquest, nor such a concurrence of
conditions as could enable any State to become thus preponderant; while
on the other hand the Empire and the Church, each fighting for its own
hand, were perpetual fountains of discord. The factions of Guelph
(papal) and Ghibelline[542] (imperial) stereotyped and intensified for
centuries every proclivity to strife inherent in the Italian
populations.

All the cities alike were at once industrial and military, with the
exception of Rome; and for all alike a career of mere plunder was out of
the question, though every city sought to enlarge its territory.
Forcible unification could conceivably be wrought only by the emperor or
the Papacy; and in the nature of things these powers became enemies,
carrying feud into the heart of every city in Italy, as well as setting
each on one or the other side according as the majority swayed for the
moment. At times, as after the destruction of Milan by Frederick
Barbarossa, hatred of the foreigner and despot could unite a number of
cities in a powerful league; but though the emperor was worsted there
was no excising the trouble of the separate interests of the bishops and
the nobles, or that of the old jealousies and hatreds of many of the
cities for each other. Pope Innocent IV, after the death of Frederick II
in 1250, turned against the Papacy many of the Milanese by his
arrogance. They had made immense sacrifices for the Guelph cause; and
their reward was to be threatened with excommunication for an
ecclesiastical dispute.[543] The Christian religion not only did not
avail to make Italians less madly quarrelsome than pagan Greeks: it
embittered and complicated every difference; and if the cities could
have agreed to keep out the Germans, the Papacy would not have let them.
Commonly it played them one against the other, preaching union only when
there was a question of a crusade.

     Some writers, even non-Catholics, have spoken of the Papacy as a
     unifying factor in Italian life. Machiavelli, who was pretty well
     placed for knowing where the shoe pinched, repeatedly (_Istorie
     fiorentine_, l. i; _Discorsi sopra Tito Livio_, i, 12) speaks of it
     bitterly as being at all times the source of invasion and of
     disunion in Italy. This is substantially the view of Gregorovius
     (_Geschichte der Stadt Rom_, B. iv, cap. iii, ¤ 3) as to the
     process in the city of Rome to begin with. So also Symonds: "The
     whole history of Italy proves that Machiavelli was right when he
     asserted that the Church had persistently maintained the nation in
     disunion for the furtherance of her own selfish ends" (_Renaissance
     in Italy: The Age of the Despots_, ed. 1907, p. 75).

As a civilising lore or social science the religion of professed love
and fraternity, itself a theatre of divisions and discords,[544] counted
literally for less than nothing against the passions of ignorance,
egoism, and patriotism; for ignorant all orders of the people still
were--more ignorant than the Greeks of Athens--in the main matters of
political knowledge and self-knowledge.[545] Yet such is the creative
power of free intelligence even in a state of strife--given but the
conditions of economic furtherance and variety of life and of
culture-contact--that in this warring Italy of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries there grew up a civilisation almost as manifold as
that of Hellas itself. The elements of variety, of culture, and of
competition were present in nearly as potent a degree. In the north, in
particular, the Lombard, and Tuscan, and other cities differed widely in
their industries. Florence, besides being one of the great centres of
European banking, was eminently the city of various occupations,
manufacturing and trading in woollens and silks and gold brocades,
working in gold and jewelry, the metals, and leather, and excelling in
dyes. In 1266 the reformed constitution specified twelve _arti_ or
crafts, seven major and five minor, the latter list being later
increased to fourteen.[546] Pisa, beginning as a commercial seaport,
trading with the East, whither she exported the iron of Elba, became the
first great seat of the woollen manufacture.[547] Milan, besides silks
and woollens, manufactured in particular weapons and armour. Genoa had
factories of wool, cotton, silk, maroquin, leather, embroidery, and
silver and gold thread.[548] Bologna was in a special degree a culture
city, with its school of law, and as such would have its special minor
industries. But indeed every one of the countless Italian republics,
with its specialty of dialect, of life, and of outward aspect, must have
had something of its own to contribute to the complex whole.[549]

In the south the Norman kingdom set up in the eleventh century meant yet
another norm of life, for there Frederick II established the University
of Naples; and Saracen contact told alike on thought and imagination.
All through these regions there now reigned something like a common
speech, the skeleton of old Latin newly suppled and newly clothed upon;
and for all educated men the Latin itself was the instrument of thought
and intercourse. For them, too, the Church and the twofold law
constituted a common ground of culture and discipline. On this composite
soil, under heats of passion and stresses of warring energies, there
gradually grew the many-seeded flower of a new literature.

Gradual indeed was the process. Italy, under stress of struggle, was
still relatively backward at a time when Germany and France, and even
England, under progressive conditions quickened with studious life;[550]
and there was a great intellectual movement in France, in particular, in
the twelfth century, when Italy had nothing of the kind to show, save as
regarded the important part played by the law school of Bologna in
educating jurists for the whole of western Europe. For other
developments there still lacked the needed conditions, both political
and social. The first economic furtherance given to mental life by the
cities seems to have been the endowment of law schools and
chronicle-writers; the schools of Ravenna and Bologna, and the first
chronicles, dating from the eleventh century. Salerno had even earlier
had a medical school, long famous, which may or may not have been
municipally endowed.[551] To the Church, as against her constant
influence for discord and her early encouragement of illiteracy,[552]
must be credited a share in these beginnings. After the law school of
Bologna (whence in 1222 was founded that of Padua, by a secession of
teachers and students at strife with the citizens) had added medicine
and philology to its chairs, the Papacy gave it a faculty of theology;
and in Rome itself the Church had established a school of law. The first
great literary fruit of this intellectual ferment is the _Summa
Theologiae_ of St. Thomas Aquinas (1225-74), a performance in which the
revived study of Aristotle, set up by the stimulus of Saracen culture,
is brought by a capacious and powerful mind to the insuperable task of
philosophising at once the Christian creed and the problems of
Christendom. Close upon this, the Latin expression of accepted medieval
thought, comes the great achievement of Dante, wherein a new genius for
the supreme art of rhythmic speech has preserved for ever the profound
vibration of all the fierce and passionate Italian life of the Middle
Ages. In his own spirit he carries it all, save its vice and levity. Its
pitiless cruelty, its intellectuality, its curious observation, its
ingrained intolerance, its piercing flashes of tenderness, its capacity
for intense and mystic devotion, its absolute dogmatism in every field
of thought, the whole pell-mell of its vehement experience, throbs
through every canto of his welded strain. And no less does he incarnate
for ever its fatal incapacity for some political compromise. For Dante,
politics is first and last a question of the dominance of his faction:
his fellow-citizens are for him Guelphs or Ghibellines, and he shares
the Florentine rabies against rival or even neighbouring towns; his
imperialism serving merely to extend the field of blind strife, never to
subject strife to the play of reason. Exiled for faction by the other
faction, he foreshadows the doom of Florence.


¤ 2

With Dante we are already in the fourteenth century, close upon Petrarch
and Boccaccio; and already the whole course of political things is
curving back to tyranny, for lack of faculty in the cities, placed as
they were, to learn the lesson of politics. Their inhabitants could
neither combine as federations to secure well-being for all of their own
members, nor cease to combine as groups against each other. Always their
one principle of union remained negative--animal hatred of city to city,
of faction to faction. It is important then to seek for a clear notion
of the forces which fostered mental life and popular prosperity
alongside of influences which wrought for demoralisation and
dissolution. Taking progress to consist on one hand in increase and
diffusion of knowledge and art, and on the other in better distribution
of wealth, we find that slavery, to begin with, was substantially
extinguished in the time of conflict between cities, barons, and
emperor.

     Already in the fifth century the process had begun in Gaul. Guizot
     treats the change from slave to free labour as a mystery. "Quand et
     comment il s'opŽra au sein du monde romain, je ne le sais pas; et
     personne, je crois, ne l'a dŽcouvert; mais ... au commencement du
     Ve sicle, ce pas Žtait fait; il y avait, dans toutes les grandes
     villes de la Gaule, une classe assez nombreuse d'artisans libres;
     dŽjˆ mme ils Žtaient constituŽs en corporations.... La plupart des
     corporations, dont on a continuŽ d'attribuer l'origine au moyen
     ‰ge, remontent, dans le midi de la Gaule surtout et en Italie, au
     monde romain" (_Civilisation en France_, i, 57). But a few pages
     before (p. 51) we are told that at the _end_ of the _fourth_
     century free men commenced in crowds to seek the protection of
     powerful persons. On this we have the testimony of Salvian (_De
     gubernatione Dei_, lib. v). The solution seems to be that the
     "freed" class in the rural districts were the serfs of the glebe,
     who, as we have seen, were rapidly substituted for slaves in Italy
     in the last age of the Empire; and that in the towns in the same
     way the crumbling upper class slackened its hold on its slaves.
     Both in town and country such detached poor folk would in time of
     trouble naturally seek the protection of powerful persons, thus
     preparing the way for feudalism.

     At the same time the barbarian conquerors maintained slavery as a
     matter of course, so that in the transition period slaves were
     perhaps more numerous than ever before (cp. Milman, _Hist. Lat.
     Christ._ 4th ed. ii, 45-46; Lecky, _European Morals_, ed. 1884, ii,
     70). Whatever were the case in the earlier ages of barbarian
     irruption, it seems clear that during the Dark Ages the general
     tendency was to reduce "small men" in general to a servile status,
     whether they were of the conquering or the conquered stock. Cp.
     Guizot, _Essais_, as cited, pp. 161-72; _Civilisation_, iii, 172,
     190-203 (leons 7, 8). The different grades of _coloni_ and _servi_
     tended to approximate to the same subjection in Europe as in the
     England of the twelfth century. But in France and Italy betterment
     seems to have set in about the eleventh century; and the famous
     ordinance of Louis the Fat in 1118 (given by Guizot, iii, 204)
     tells of a general movement, largely traceable to the Crusades,
     which in this connection wrought good for the tillers of the soil
     in the process of squandering the wealth of their masters. Cp.
     Duruy, _Hist. de France_, ed. 1880, i, 291.

The process of causation is still somewhat obscure, and is further
beclouded by _a priori_ views and prepossessions as to the part played
by religion in the change. The fact that the Catholic Church everywhere,
though the last to free her own slaves,[553] encouraged penitents to
free theirs, is taken as a phenomenon of religion, though we have seen
slavery of the worst description[554] flourishing within the past
century in a devoutly Protestant community. Pope Urban II actually
reduced to slavery the wives of priests who refused to submit to the law
of celibacy, handing them over to the nobles or bishops.[555] The
rational inference is that the motives in the medieval abandonment of
slavery, as in its disuse towards the end of the Roman Empire, and as in
its later re-establishments in Christian States, were economic--that (1)
nobles on the one hand and burghers on the other found it to their
advantage to free their slaves for military purposes,[556] by way of
getting money; (2) that the Church in the Dark Ages actually had to
enrol many serfs as priests, the desire of freemen to escape military
service by taking orders having made necessary a prohibitory law;[557]
and (3) that the Church further promoted the process,[558] especially
during the crusading period, because a free laity was to her more
profitable than one of slaves--as apart from her own serfs. Freemen
could be made to pay clerical dues: slaves could not, save on a very
small scale.

     See Larroque, as cited, ch. ii. The claim of Guizot (_Essais_, p.
     167; _Civ. en Europe_, le. 6) that the religious character of most
     of the formulas of enfranchisement proves them to have had a
     specially Christian motive, is pure fallacy. Before Christianity
     the process of manumission was a religious solemnity, being
     commonly carried out in the pagan temples (cp. A. Calderini, _La
     manomissione e la condizione dei liberti in Grecia_, 1908, p. 96
     _sq._), and there were myriads of freedmen. It appears from Cicero
     (_Philipp._ viii, 11, cited by Wallon, _Hist. de l'esclavage dans
     l'antiquitŽ_, ii, 419) that a well-behaved slave might expect his
     liberty in six years. Among the acts of Constantine to establish
     Christianity was the transference of this function of manumission
     from the pagan temples to the churches. Thus Christianity took over
     the process, like the idea of "natural equality" itself, from the
     pagans.

And the principle goes farther. In Adam Smith's not altogether coherent
discussion of the general question,[559] the unprofitableness of slave
labour in comparison with free is urged, probably rightly, as counting
for much more than the alleged bull of Alexander III (12th century);
while the interest of the sovereign as against the noble is noted as a
further factor. As regards the "love of domination" to which Smith
attributes the slowness of slave-owners to see the inferiority of slave
labour, it is to be remembered that the Roman slave-owner was fixed in
his bias by the perpetual influx of captives and cheap slaves from the
East; that this resource was lacking to the medieval Italians, who had
to take the costly course of breeding most of their slaves; and that in
such circumstances the concurrent pressure of all the other causes
mentioned could very well suffice to make emancipation general.

While the lowest stratum of the people was thus being raised, the state
of war was for a time comparatively harmless by reason of the
primitiveness of the fighting. The cities were all alike walled, and
incapable of capture in the then state of military technique;[560] so
they had periodical conflicts[561] which often came to nothing, and
involved no heavy outlay; even the long struggle with Barbarossa was
much less vitally costly to the cities than to Germany. Frederick's
eight variously devastating campaigns, ending in frustration, were the
beginning of the medieval demoralisation of Germany,[562] to which such
a policy meant retrogression in industry and agriculture; while the
Lombards, traders and cultivators first, and soldiers only secondarily,
rapidly made good all their heavy losses.

It was when the practice of war grew more and more systematic under
Frederick II, and the policy of cities became more and more capricious
for or against the Emperor, that their mutual animosities became more
commonly savage. Thus we read that in 1250 "the Parmesans were
overthrown by the Cremonese, losing 3,000 men. The captives were bound
in the gravel-pit near the Taro ... the whole population seemed to have
been captured. The Cremonese tortured them shamefully, drawing their
teeth and ramming toads into their mouths. The exiles from Parma were
more cruel to their countrymen than the Cremonese were."[563] And,
indeed, the Parmesans a century before had burned Borgo San Donnino and
led away all its inhabitants as prisoners.[564] Now the Cremonese threw
into prison 1,575 of their Parmesan enemies; and when after a year the
dungeons were thrown open, only 318 remained alive.[565] Thus
civilisation in effect went backwards on several lines at once, the
spirit of internecine strife growing step by step with the economic
process under which the community divided into rich and poor, as
formerly into noble and plebeian.

Up till the end of the thirteenth century, however, the growth of
capital went on slowly,[566] and the division between rich and poor was
not deep, the less so because thus far the middle and upper classes held
by the sentiment of civic patriotism to the extent of being ready to
spend freely for civic purposes, while they spent little on themselves
as compared with the rich of a later period. So that, although the
republics were from the first, in differing degrees, aristocratic rather
than democratic--the _popolo_ being the body of upper-class and
middle-class citizens with the franchise, not the mass of the
population--and though the workers had later to struggle for their
political privileges very much as did the plebs of ancient Rome, the
economic conditions were for a considerable period healthy enough. A
rapid expansion of upper-class wealth seems to have begun in the
thirteenth century, in connection, apparently, with the new usury[567]
and the new monopolist commerce connected with the Crusades; and it is
from this time that the economic conditions so markedly alter as to
infect the political unity and independence of the republics without
substituting any ideal of a wider union.

     Much of the wealth of Florence must in early republican times have
     been drawn from the agriculture of the surrounding plains, which
     had a large population. Machiavelli (_Istorie fiorentine_, 1. ii)
     states that when at the death of Frederick II the city reorganised
     its military, there were formed twenty companies in the town and
     sixty-six in the country. Cp. Hallam, _Middle Ages_, iii, 365.
     Dante (_Paradiso_, xv, 97-129) pictures the Florentine upper class
     as living frugally in the reign of Conrad III (d. 1152). Borghini
     and Giovanni Villani decide that the same standards still prevailed
     till the middle of the thirteenth century. (Cited by Villari, p.
     200, and Testa, pp. 89-91: cp. Riccobaldi of Ferrara, there cited
     from Muratori; Pignotti, _Hist. of Tuscany_, Eng. tr. iii, 293;
     Trollope, _History of Florence_, i, 34; and Hallam, _Middle Ages_,
     11th ed. iii, 342-44.) If these testimonies can be in any degree
     trusted, the growth of wealth and luxury may be inferred to have
     taken place in part through the money-lending system developed by
     the Florentines in the period of the later Crusades, in part
     through the great commercial developments.

     The wool-trade, in which Florentines soon surpassed Pisa by reason
     of their skill in dyeing, was a basis for capitalistic commerce,
     inasmuch as the wool they dyed and manufactured was mostly foreign,
     the Tuscan region being better suited for the growing of corn,
     wine, and olives than for pasture. Already in 1202 the Florentine
     wool trade had its consuls. (Villari puts these much earlier. He
     traces them in 1182, and thinks they were then long established.
     _Two First Centuries_, pp. 124, 313.) Woollen-weaving was first
     noticeably improved by the lay order of the Umiliati at Milan about
     1020; and this order was introduced about 1210 into Florence, where
     it received special privileges. Thenceforward the city became the
     great emporium for the finer cloths till the Flemings and English
     learned to compete. (Pignotti, _Hist. of Tuscany_, as cited, iii,
     265-70.)

     The silk manufacture, brought into Sicily from the islands of the
     Archipelago by Roger II in 1147, and carried north from Sicily in
     the reign of Frederick III, seems to have existed in Florence at
     the beginning of the thirteenth century, but to have flourished at
     first on a larger scale at Lucca, whence, on the sack of the town
     by Uguccioni della Faggiola in 1315, most of the Lucchese
     manufacturers fled to Florence, taking their trade with them.
     (Pignotti, iii, 273-74; Villari, _Two First Centuries_, p. 323.)
     Many had fled to Venice from the power of Castruccio Castracani,
     five years earlier. (Below, p. 243.) Being much more profitable
     than any other, by reason of the high prices, it seems to have
     speedily ranked as more aristocratic than the wool trade; and when
     that declined, the silk trade restored Florentine prosperity.
     (Villari, as cited.)

     The business of banking, again, must have been much developed
     before the Bardi and the Peruzzi could lend 1,500,000 florins to
     Edward III of England (G. Villani, xi, 88; xii, 54, 56; Gibbins,
     _History of Commerce_, 1891, pp. 47, 48; Hallam, _Middle Ages_,
     iii, 340. Pignotti, iii, 279, Eng. tr., estimates the sum lent as =
     £3,000,000 of modern money). This function, in turn, arose on the
     basis of commerce, and the _cambisti_ are subjects of legal
     regulation in Florence as early as 1299. (Pignotti, iii, 276.) On
     this line capitalism must have been developed greatly, till it
     became the preponderant power in the State. Even as the kings and
     tyrants were enabled, by borrowing from the bankers, to wage wars
     which otherwise might have been impossible to them, the republican
     statesman who could command the moneyed interest was destined to
     supersede the merely military tyrant. In Genoa the bankers
     coalesced in a corporation called the Bank of St. George, which
     controlled politics, traded, and even made conquests, thus giving a
     historic lead to the Bank of Amsterdam. (Cp. Hallam, _Middle
     Ages_, iii, 341; J.T. Bent, _Genoa_, 1881, ch. ii.)

     Summing up the industrial evolution, we note that about 1340 there
     were 200 cloth factories in Florence; and a century later 272, of
     which 83 made silk and cloth-of-gold. At the latter period there
     were 72 bankers or money-changers, 66 apothecary shops, 30
     goldbeaters, and 44 of goldsmiths, silversmiths, and jewellers. The
     artisan population was estimated at 30,000; and gold currency at
     two millions of florins (Pignotti, iii, 290-91). Concerning Milan,
     it is recorded that in 1288, a generation after it had lost its
     liberties, it had a population of 200,000 (certainly an
     exaggeration), 13,000 houses, 600 notaries, 200 physicians, 80
     schoolmasters, and 50 copyists of MSS. (Hallam, _Middle Ages_, i,
     393, citing Galvaneus Flamma; cp. Ranke, _Latin and Teutonic
     Nations_, Eng. tr. p. 111.)


¤ 3

We can now generalise, then, the conditions of the rise of the arts and
sciences in medieval Italy. First we have seen commerce, handicraft, and
architecture flourish in the new free cities, as they did at the same
time in Genoa, Pisa, and Venice. In the south, again, in the Two
Sicilies, under the reign of Frederick II, prosperous industry and
commerce, in contact and rivalry with those of the Saracens, supplied a
similar basis, though without yielding such remarkable fruits. There,
however, on the stimulus of Saracen literature, occur the decided
beginnings of a new literature, in a speech at once vernacular and
courtly, as being accepted by the emperor and the aristocracy. The same
conditions, indeed, had existed before Frederick, under the later Norman
kings; and it is in Sicily about 1190 that we must date the oldest known
verses in an Italian dialect.[568] Some of them refer to Saladin; and
the connection between Italian and Arab literature goes deeper than that
detail; for there is reason to suppose that in Europe the very use of
rhyme, arising as it thus did in the sphere of Saracen culture-contact,
derives from Saracen models.[569] In any case, the Moorish poetry
certainly influenced the beginnings of the Italian and Spanish. About
the same time, however, there occurs the important literary influence of
the troubadours, radiating from Provence, where, again, the special
source of fertilisation was the culture of the Moors.[570] The Provenal
speech, developed in a more stable life,[571] took literary form before
the Italian, and yielded a literature which was the most effective
stimulus to that of Italy. And, broadly speaking, the troubadours stood
socially for either the leisured upper class or a class which
entertained and was supported by it.

Here, then, as regards imaginative and artistic literature, we find the
beginnings made in the sphere of the beneficent prince or "tyrant." But,
exactly as in Greece, it is only in the struggling and stimulating life
of the free cities that there arises, after the period of primary song,
the great reflective literature, the great art: and, furthermore, the
pursuit of letters at the courts of the princes is itself a result of
outside stimulus. It needed the ferment of Moorish culture--itself
promoted by the special tolerance of the earlier Ommiades towards Jews
and Christians--to produce the literary stir in Sicily and Provence.
Again, while the Provenal life, like the Moorish, included a remarkable
development of free thought, the first great propagation of
quasi-rational heresy in the south occurring in Provence, it was in the
free Italian cities, where also many _Cathari_ and _Paterini_ were found
for burning, that there arose the more general development of
intelligence. That is to say, the intellectual climate, the mental
atmosphere, in which great literature grows, is here as elsewhere found
to be supplied by the "free" State, in which men's wills and ideas clash
and compromise.[572] In turbulent Florence of the thirteenth century was
nourished the spirit of Dante. And it is with art as with literature.
Modern painting begins in the thirteenth century in Florence with
Cimabue, and at Siena with Duccio, who, trained like previous Italian
painters of other towns in the Byzantine manner, transcended it and led
the Renaissance.

The great step once taken, the new speech once broadly fixed, and the
new art-ideal once adumbrated by masters, both literature and art could
in differing sort flourish under the regimen of more or less propitious
princes; but not so as to alter the truth just stated. What could best
of all thrive was art. Architecture, indeed, save for one or two great
undertakings, can hardly be said to have ever outgone the achievement of
the republican period; and painting was first broadly developed by
public patronage; but it lay in the nature of the case that painting
could find ample economic furtherance under the princes and under the
Church. For the rule of the princes was not, save in one or two places
at a time, a tyranny of the kind that destroys all individuality; the
invention of printing, and the general use of Latin, now maintained a
constant interaction of thought throughout all Europe, checked only by
the throttling hand of the Church; and the arts of form and colour, once
well grown, are those which least closely depend on, though they also
thrive by, a free all-round intellectual life. The efficient cause of
the great florescence of Italian art from the thirteenth to the
sixteenth century was economic--the unparalleled _demand_ for art on the
part alike of the cities, the Church, the princes, and the rich. From
the tenth to the thirteenth century the outstanding economic phenomenon
in Italy is the growth of wealth by industry and commerce. In the same
period, Italian agriculture so flourished that by the fifteenth century
Italy would on this ground alone have ranked as the richest of European
countries.[573] From the thirteenth to the sixteenth century the
outstanding economic fact is the addition to this still increasing
wealth of the foreign revenues of the Church.[574]

In the sixteenth century all three sources of wealth are almost
simultaneously checked--that from agriculture through the miserable
devastation wrought by the wars[575] and by the Spanish and papal rule;
and then it is that the great art period begins to draw to its close.
While the revenue of the Church from the northern countries was sharply
curtailed by the Reformation, which in rapid succession affected
Germany, France, Holland, Switzerland, England, Scotland, and the
Scandinavian States, the trade of Italy began to be affected through the
development of the new sea route round the Cape of Good Hope by the
Portuguese; and though that gradual change need not have brought
depression speedily, the misrule of Leo X, raised to an unprecedented
secular power, and the crowning blow of the Spanish Conquest, following
upon the other and involving government by Spanish methods, were the
beginning of the end of Italian greatness.

     Prof. Thorold Rogers repeatedly generalises (_Six Centuries of
     Work and Wages_, p. 157; _Holland_, p. 49; _Economic Interpretation
     of History_, p. 11) that the Turkish conquest of Egypt (1517)
     blocked the only remaining road to the East known to the Old World;
     and that thenceforth the trade of the Rhine and Danube was so
     impoverished as to ruin the German nobles, who speedily took to
     oppressing their tenants, and so brought about the Peasants' War,
     while "the Italian cities fell into rapid decay." Whatever be the
     truth as to Germany, the statement as to Italy is very doubtful.
     The Professor confessedly came to these conclusions from having
     observed a "sudden and enormous rise in the prices of all Eastern
     products" at the close of the first quarter of the sixteenth
     century, not from having ascertained first the decay of the Italian
     cities. Now, H. Scherer expressly notes (_Allgemeine Geschichte des
     Welthandels_, 1852, i, 336), that Selim I, after conquering Egypt,
     made terms with his old enemies the Venetians (who were then the
     main Eastern traders in Italy) and "bestowed on them all the
     privileges they had under the Mamelukes." Prof. Rogers states that
     "the thriving manufactures of Alexandria were at once destroyed."
     Scherer states that Selim freed from imposts all the Indian wares
     brought into his States through Alexandria, while he burdened
     heavily all that came by way of Lisbon. Heyd sums up (_Histoire du
     commerce du Levant_, Žd. fran. 1886, ii, 546), that "under the new
     rŽgime as under the old, Egypt and Syria remained open to the
     Venetian merchants." It is hard to reconcile these data with the
     assertions of Prof. Rogers; and his statement as to prices is
     further indecisive because the Portuguese trade by sea should have
     availed to counteract the effect of the closing of the Egyptian
     route, if that _were_ closed. But the subject remains obscure:
     Prof. Gibbins (_History of Commerce in Europe_, 1891, pp. 56, 57)
     follows Rogers without criticism. The difficulty is that, as
     Scherer complains (i, 272), we have very few records as to Italian
     trade. "They have illustrated nearly everything, but least of all
     their commerce and their commercial politics." The lack of
     information Scherer sets down to the internecine jealousy of the
     cities. But see the list of works of the fourteenth and fifteenth
     centuries given by Heyd, i, p. xvii _sq._, and his narrative,
     _passim_.

So superficially has history been written that it is difficult to gather
the effect thus far of the change in the channels of trade; but there
seems to be no obscurity as to the effect of papal and Spanish rule.
What the arrest of trade began, and the rule of Leo X promoted, the
desperate wars of France and Spain for the possession of Italy
completed, and the misgovernment of the Spanish crown from 1530 onwards
perpetuated. Under sane rule peace might have brought recuperation; but
Spanish rule was ruin prolonged. Destructive taxation, and still more
destructive monopolies, paralysed commerce in the cities under Spanish
sway; while the executive was so weak for good that brigandage abounded
in the interior, and the coasts were raided periodically by the fleets
of the Turks or the Algerine pirates. The decline of the art of painting
in Italy (apart from Venice and Rome) being broadly coincident with this
collapse, the induction is pretty clear that the economic demand had
been the fundamental force in the artistic development. The Church and
the despot remained, but the artistic growth ceased.

     Always in need of money for his vast outlays, Leo administered his
     secular power solely with a view to his own immediate revenue, and
     set up trade monopolies in Florence and the papal estates wherever
     he could. As to the usual effects of the papal power on commerce,
     see Napier, _Florentine History_, 1845, ii, 413. "The Court of
     Rome, since it had ceased to respect the ancient municipal
     liberties, never extended its authority over a new province without
     ruining its population and resources" (Sismondi, _Short History_,
     p. 319). Roscoe (_Life of Leo X_, ed. 1846, ii, 207) speaks of a
     revival of Florentine commerce under Leo's kinsman, the Cardinal,
     about 1520; but this is almost the only glance at the subject of
     trade and administration in Roscoe's work.

     Under Pope Gregory XIII (1572-84) there was for a time fair
     prosperity in States that had formerly suffered from more
     precarious tyrannies; but ere long "the taxes laid upon persons,
     property, and commerce, to replace the lost revenues of
     Christendom, dried up these resources"; and many cities fell into
     poverty. Ancona in particular was so crushed by a tax on imports
     that her Mediterranean trade was lost once for all. (Zeller,
     _Histoire d'Italie_, 1853, p. 406.) Sismondi's charge is
     substantially borne out also by Ranke's account (_History of the
     Popes_, Eng. trans. 1-vol. ed. 1859, pp. 118-19) of the ruinous
     impositions of Pope Sixtus V (1585-90), who taxed the poorest
     trades and the necessaries of life, besides debasing the coinage
     and raising further revenue from the sale of places at exorbitant
     prices, leaving the holders to recoup themselves by extortion and
     corruption. Cp., however, Zeller, pp. 409-10, as to his municipal
     improvements.

     As to Spanish misrule, see Cant, _Storia degli Italiani_, cap.
     139, ed. pop. ix, 512; Sismondi, _RŽpubliques_, xvi, 71-76, 158-59,
     170, 217; Symonds, _Renaissance_, vol. vi, pt. i (Catholic
     Reaction), pp. 52, 65; Procter, _History of Italy_, 1844, pp. 218,
     219, following Muratori and Giannone; Spalding, _Italy_, ii,
     264-72, citing many other sources. "The Spaniards, as a Milanese
     writer indignantly remarks, possessed Central Lombardy for 172
     years. They found in its chief city 300,000 souls; they left in it
     scarcely a third of that number. They found in it seventy-five
     woollen manufactories; they left in it no more than five"
     (Spalding, ii, 272). Agriculture suffered equally. The decay of
     manufactures might be set down to outside causes, not so the rise
     in taxation.

     Yet the decadence does not seem to have been universal, or at least
     was not continuous. In Sicily, it is alleged, though the statement
     is hardly credible, the revenue, which in 1558 was 1,770,000
     ducats, was in 1620 5,000,000 (Leo, _Geschichte von Italien_, v,
     506, 507); and at the latter date, according to Howell, Naples
     abounded "in rich staple commodities, as silks, cottons, and
     wines," from which there accrued to the King of Spain "a mighty
     revenue," which, however, was mostly spent in the province, being
     "eaten up 'twixt governors, garrisons, and officers" (Letter of
     October, 1621, in _Epistol¾ Ho-elian¾_, Bennett's ed. 1891, i,
     130). Thus there would seem to have been marked fluctuations, for
     in the time of Pope Gregory Naples is described as sinking under
     oppression and Milan as prosperous (Zeller, p. 407). The inference
     seems to be that some governors learned from the failures of their
     predecessors to handle trade aright.

     The case of Florence after 1587, finally, shows how a wise ruler
     could so profit by experience as to restore prosperity where
     misrule had driven it out. Duke Ferdinand (1587-1609) was
     technically as much a "tyrant" as his brother and predecessor
     Francis, but by wise public works he restored prosperity to Leghorn
     and to Pisa, whose population had latterly fallen from 22,000 to
     8,000 (Zeller, pp. 406, 411), and so increased both population and
     revenue that he even set up a considerable naval power. The net
     result was that at 1620, even under less sagacious successors,
     Florence "marvellously flourished with buildings, with wealth, and
     with artisans"; and the people of all degrees were declared to live
     "not only well but splendidly well, notwithstanding the manifold
     exactions of the Duke upon all things" (Howell's Letter of
     November, 1621, ed. cited, i, 136).

We are in sight, then, of the solution of the dispute as to whether it
was the republics or the "tyrants" that evoked the arts and literature
in medieval and Renaissance Italy. The true generalisation embraces both
sides. It may be well, however, to meet in full the "protectionist" or
"monarchist" view, as it has been very judiciously put by an
accomplished specialist in Italian culture history, in criticism of the
other theory:--

     "The obliteration of the parties beneath despotism was needed,
     under actual conditions, for that development of arts and industry
     which raised Italy to a first place among civilised nations. We are
     not justified by the facts in assuming that, had the free burghs
     continued independent, arts and literature would have risen to a
     greater height. Venice, in spite of an uninterrupted republican
     career, produced no commanding men of letters, and owed much of her
     splendour in the art of painting to aliens from Cadore,
     Castle-franco, and Verona. Genoa remained silent and irresponsive
     to the artistic movement of Italy to the last days of the Republic,
     when her independence was but a shadow. Pisa, though a burgh of
     Tuscany, displayed no literary talent, while her architecture dates
     from the first period of the Commune. Siena, whose republican
     existence lasted longer even than that of Florence, contributed
     nothing of importance to Italian literature. The art of Perugia was
     developed during the ascendency of despotic families. The painting
     of the Milanese school owes its origin to Lodovico Sforza, and
     survived the tragic catastrophes of his capital, which suffered
     more than any other from the brutalities of Spaniards and
     Frenchmen. Next to Florence, the most brilliant centres of literary
     activity during the bright days of the Renaissance were princely
     Ferrara and royal Naples. Lastly, we might insist upon the fact
     that the Italian language took its first flight in the court of
     imperial Palermo, while republican Rome remained dumb throughout
     the earlier stage of Italian literary evolution. Thus the facts of
     the case seem to show that culture and republican independence were
     not so closely united in Italy as some historians would seek to
     make us believe.

     "On the other hand, it is impossible to prove that the despotisms
     of the fifteenth century were necessary to the perfecting of art
     and literature. All that can be safely advanced upon this subject
     is that the pacification of Italy was demanded as a preliminary
     condition, and that this pacification came to pass through the
     action of the princes, checked and equilibrated by the oligarchies
     of Venice and Florence. It might further be urged that the despots
     were in close sympathy with the masses of the people, shared their
     enthusiasms, and promoted their industry.... To be a prince and not
     to be the patron of scholarship, the pupil of the humanists, and
     the founder of libraries, was an impossibility. In like manner they
     employed their wealth upon the development of arts and industries.
     The great age of Florentine painting is indissolubly connected with
     the memories of Casa Medici. Rome owes her magnificence to the
     despotic popes. Even the pottery of Gubbio was the creation of the
     ducal house of Urbino."[576]

The criticism of this well-marshalled passage may best be put in a
summary form, as thus:--

I. (_a_) The despot promoter of arts and letters is here admittedly the
pupil and product of a previous culture. That being so, he could avail
for fresh culture in so far as he gave it economic furtherance. He might
even give such furtherance on some sides in a fuller degree than ever
did the Republics. But he could _not_ give (though after the invention
of printing he could not wholly destroy) the mental atmosphere needed to
produce great literature. None of the above-cited illustrations goes any
way to prove that he could; and it is easy to show that his influence
was commonly belittling to those who depended on him.

(_b_) The point as to pacification is unduly pressed, or is perhaps
accidentally misstated. It is not to be denied that the despot in the
Italian cities, as in old Greece and Rome, did in a measure earn popular
support by giving the common people relief from the strifes of Guelphs
and Ghibellines. But the despots did not pacify Italy, though they to
some extent set up local stability by checking faction feuds.

(_c_) The popes were in the earlier Middle Ages a main cause of the
ill-development of Rome. Their splendid works were much later than many
of those of the Republics. St. Mark's at Venice, a result of Byzantine
contact, was built in the eleventh century, as was the duomo of Pisa,
whose baptistery and tower belong to the twelfth. The Campo Santa of
Pisa, again, belongs to the thirteenth and fourteenth, and the Palazzo
Vecchio of Florence to the end of the thirteenth. And the great
architects and sculptors of the thirteenth century were mostly
Pisans.[577]

II. The point as to the lack of the right intellectual atmosphere under
the princes can be proved by a comparison of products. The literature
that is intellectually great, in the days before printing equalised and
distributed cultures, belongs from first to last to Florence. Dante and
Machiavelli are its terms; both standing for the experience of affairs
in a disturbed but self-governing community; and it was in Florence that
Boccaccio formed his powers. "Florentine art and letters, constituting
the most fertile seeds of art and letters in Italy, were essentially
republican; many writers, and most of the artists, of Florence were the
offspring of traders or labouring men."[578] What the popes and the
princes protected and developed was the literature of scholarship, their
donations constituting an endowment of research. If the revival of
classic learning and the rapid growth of art after the middle of the
fifteenth century be held, as by some historians, to be the essence of
the Renaissance,[579] then the Renaissance is largely the work of the
despots. But even the artists and scholars patronised by Cosimo de'
Medici were formed before his time,[580] and there is no proportional
increase in number or achievement afterwards. On the other hand, it was
_mere_ scholarship that the potentates fostered: Lorenzo Valla, welcomed
for his _Elegantiae latinae linguae_, had barely escaped exile for his
_De falsa donatione Constantini Magni_;[581] and it is impossible to
show that they promoted thought save in such a case as the encouragement
of the Platonic philosophy by Cosimo and Lorenzo. For the rest, the
character of the humanists whom the potentates fostered is admittedly
illaudable in nearly every case. Pomponius L¾tus, who almost alone of
his class bears scrutiny as a personality, expressly set his face
against patronage, and sought to live as a free professor in the
University of Rome.[582] And it is open to argument, finally, whether
the princely patronage of the merely retrospective humanists did not
check vital culture in Italy.[583] It is true that when "despotism" has
been so long acquiesced in as to mean a stable social state, there may
take place under it new forms of intellectual life. The later cases of
Galileo and Vico would suffice to prove as much. But it will hardly be
suggested that monarchic rule _evoked_ such forms of genius, any more
than that the papacy was propitious to Galileo. In both cases the
effective stimulant was foreign thought.

III. (_a_) The case of Venice has to be explained in respect of its
special conditions. Venice was from the first partly aloof from ordinary
Italian life by reason of its situation and its long Byzantine
connections. It was further an aristocratic republic of the old Roman
type, its patrician class developing as a caste of commanders and
administrators; and its foreign possessions, added to in every century,
reinforced this tendency.[584] The early usage of civic trading, carried
on by means of fleets owned by the State, was habitually turned to the
gain of the ruling minority. The use of the fleets was generally granted
to monopoly companies, who paid no duties, while private persons did;
the middle classes in general being allowed to trade only under
burdensome restrictions.[585] Here were conditions contrary in effect to
those of the progressive days of Greece. Contrasted with Florence, the
Italian Athens, Venice has even been likened to Sparta by a modern
Italian.[586] It has been more justly compared, however,[587] with
Rhodes, which, unlike Sparta, was primarily a commercial and a maritime
power; and where, as in Venice, the rich merchants patronised the arts
rather than letters. From the first Venice achieved its wealth by an
energetically prosecuted trade, with no basis of landed property to set
up a leisured class. In such a city the necessarily high standards of
living,[588] as well as the prevailing habit and tradition, would keep
men of the middle class away from literature;[589] and only men of the
middle class like Dante, or leisured officials like Poggio and Boccaccio
and Machiavelli, are found to do important literary work even in
Florence. Hence the small share of Venice in the structure of Italian
literature.

The same explanation partly holds good of art. Venice, however, at
length gave the needed economic furtherance; and men of other
communities could there find a market, as did Greek sculptors in
imperial Rome. Obviously a despot could not have evoked artists of
Venetian birth any more than did the Republic, save by driving men out
of commerce. But it is in Venice, where wealth and the republican form
lasted longest, that we find almost the last of the great
artists--Titian, Tintoretto, Veronese. After these the Caracci, Guido,
and many others gravitate to Rome, where the reorganised Church regains
some riches with power. We are to remember, too, that the aristocratic
rulers saw to the food supply of the whole Republic by a special
promotion of agriculture in its possessions, particularly in Candia;
besides carefully making treaties which secured its access to the grain
markets of Sicily, Egypt, and North Africa.[590] Here again we have to
recognise a form of civic self-preserving resource special in origin to
republics, though afterwards exploited by autocracies, as earlier in the
case of imperial Rome.

     The fact that Venice _did_ maintain great artists after the
     artistic arrest of Tuscany and Lombardy, is part of the proof that,
     as above contended (p. 221), it was papal and Spanish misrule
     rather than the change in the channels of trade that impoverished
     Italy in the sixteenth century. Venice could still prosper by her
     manufactures when her commerce was partly checked, because the
     volume of European trade went on increasing. As Hallam notes: "We
     are apt to fall into a vulgar error in supposing that Venice was
     crushed, or even materially affected [phrase slightly modified in
     footnote], as a commercial city, by the discoveries of the
     Portuguese. She was in fact _more opulent_, as her buildings
     themselves may prove, in the sixteenth century than in any
     preceding age. The French trade from Marseilles to the Levant,
     which began later to flourish, was what impoverished Venice rather
     than that of Portugal with the East Indies." As the treatise of
     Antonio Serra shows (1613), Venice was rich when Spanish Naples was
     poor (_Introduction to the Literature of Europe_, ed. 1872, iii,
     165, 166).

(_b_) As regards Genoa, the explanation is similar. That republic
resembled Venice in that it was from the beginning a city apart from the
rest of Italy, devoted to foreign commerce, and absorbed in the
management of distant possessions or trade colonies. When we compare the
intellectual history of two such States with that of Florence, which was
not less but more republican in its government, it becomes clear that it
was not republicanism that limited culture in the maritime cities.
Rather we must recognise that their development is analogous with that
of England in the eighteenth century, when the growth of commerce, of
foreign possessions, and of naval power seems to have turned the general
energies, hitherto in large proportion intellectually employed,
predominantly towards practical and administrative employment.[591] The
case of Florence is the test for the whole problem. Its pre-eminence in
art and letters alike is to be explained through (1) its being in
constant touch with all the elements of Italian and other European
culture; and (2) its having no direct maritime interests and no foreign
possessions.[592]

IV. With the patronage of the princes of Ferrara, history associates
the poetry of Ariosto and Tasso, though as a matter of fact the _Orlando
Furioso_ seems to have been written before Ariosto entered the ducal
service. But even if that and the _Gerusalemme_ be wholly credited to
the principle of monarchism, it only needs to weigh the two works
against those which were brought forth in the atmosphere of the free
cities in order to see how little mere princely pay can avail for power
and originality in literature where the princely rule thwarts the great
instincts of personality. Ariosto and Tasso are charming melodists; and
as such they have had an influence on European literature; but they have
waned in distinction age by age, while earlier and later names have
waxed. And all the while, what is delightful in them is clearly enough
the outcome of the still manifold Italian culture in which they grew,
though it may be that the influence of a court would do more to foster
sheer melody than would the storm and stress of the life of a Republic.

     Sismondi (_RŽpubliques italiennes_, iv, 416-18), admits the
     encouragement given to men of letters by despots like Can' Grande,
     and the frequent presence of poets at the courts. But he rightly
     insists that the faculty of imagination itself visibly dwindled
     when intellectual freedom was gone. It is interesting to note how
     Montaigne, writing within a century of the production of the
     _Orlando Furioso_, is struck by its want of sustained imaginative
     flight in comparison with Virgil (_Essais_, B. ii, 10; Žd.
     Firmin-Didot, vol. i, p. 432). Compare the estimate of Cant,
     _Storia degli Italiani_, cap. 142, ed. pop. x, 180-86.

In fine, we can rightly say with Mr. Symonds himself that the history of
the Renaissance is not the history of arts, or of sciences, or even of
nations. It is the history of the attainment of self-conscious freedom
by the human spirit manifested in the European races.[593] And _this_
process, surely, was not accomplished at the courts of the despots. Nor
can it well be disputed, finally, that the Spanish domination was the
visible and final check to intellectual progress on the side of
imaginative literature, at a time when there was every prospect of a
great development of Italian drama. "It was the Inquisitors and
Spaniards who cowed the Italian spirit."[594]

Equally clear is it that the republican life evolved an amount of
expansive commercial energy which at that period could not possibly have
taken place under a tyrant. The efforts by which Florence developed her
trade and power--efforts made possible by the mere union of
self-interest among the commercial class--will compare with any process
of monarchic imperialism in respect of mere persistency and success.
Faced by the jealous enmity of Pisa, their natural port, and suffering
from the trade burdens laid on them by the maritime States while they
lacked a marine, the Florentines actually opened up trade communication
with China when shut out from Egypt by the Venetians; traded through the
port of Talamone when the Pisans barred their traffic; took Provenal
and Neapolitan galleys in their pay when the Pisans and Genoese tried to
close Talamone; and, after becoming masters of Pisa in 1406, not only
established a well-ordered marine, but induced Genoa to sell to them the
port of Leghorn. They could not, indeed, successfully compete with the
Genoese and Venetians till the fall of the Greek Empire; but thereafter
they contrived to obtain abundant concessions from the Turks, while the
Genoese were driven out of the Levant. Commercial egoism, in fact,
enabled them to tread the path of "empire" even as emperors had done
long before them; and they hastened to the stage of political collapse
on the old military road, spending on one war of two years, against
Visconti, a sum equal to £15,000,000 at the present time; and in the
twenty-nine years of struggle against Pisa (1377-1406) a sum equal to
£58,000,000.[595] Thus they developed a capitalistic class, undermined
in the old way the spirit of equity which is the cement of societies,
and prepared their own subjection to a capitalist over-lord. But that is
only another way of saying that the period of expansive energy preceded
the age of the tyrant, wise or unwise.

When all is said, however, there can be no gainsaying of the judgment
that the strifes of the republics were the frustration of their culture;
and it matters little whether or not we set down the inveteracy of the
strifes to the final scantiness and ill-distribution of the culture.
Neither republics nor princes seem ever to have aimed at its diffusion.
The latter, in common with the richer ecclesiastics, did undoubtedly
promote the recovery of the literature of antiquity; but where the
republics had failed to see any need for systematic popular tuition[596]
the princes naturally did not dream of it. It would be a fallacy,
however, to suppose that, given the then state of knowledge and of
political forces, any system of public schooling could have saved
Italian liberty. No class had the science that could solve the problem
which pressed on all. The increase and culmination of social and
political evil in Renaissance Italy was an outcome of more forces than
could be checked by any expedient known to the thought of the time. It
must never be forgotten that the very dividedness of the cities, by
maximising energy, had been visibly a cause of their growth in
riches;[597] and that, though peace could have fostered that when once
it had been attained, anything like a federation which should secure to
the satisfaction of each their conflicting commercial interests was an
enormously difficult conception. It would be a bad fallacy, again, to
suppose that there was lacking to the Italians of the Renaissance a kind
of insight or judgment found in other peoples of the same period. There
is no trace of any such estimate in that age; and we who look back upon
it are rather set marvelling at the intense and luminous play of Italian
intelligence, keen as that of Redskins on the trail, so far as the
realisation of the self-expressive and self-assertive appetites could
go. The tragedy of the decadence, here as in the case of Rome, is
measured by the play of power from which men and States fall away; for
the forces which next came to the top stand for no mental superiority.
The problem, in fact, was definitely beyond the grasp of the age. It
remains to realise this by a survey of the process of decline from
self-government to despotism.
