



Chapter III

THE POLITICAL COLLAPSE


¤ 1

Given the monarchic and feudal environment, the chronic strife within
and between the Italian cities can be seen to be sufficient in time to
undo them;[598] and some wonder naturally arises at their failure to
frame some system of federal government that should restrain their
feuds. It was their supreme necessity; but though the idea was now and
then broached,[599] there is no sign that the average man ever came
nearer planning for it than did the Ghibelline Dante, with his simple
theory that C¾sar should ride the horse,[600] or than did the clear
brain of Machiavelli, with its longing for a native ruler[601] like
Cesare Borgia, capable of beating down the rival princes and the
adventurers, and of holding his own against the Papacy. One of the
statesmen who harboured the ideal was Rienzi; but he never wrought for
its realisation, and his devotion to the Papacy as well as to the
headship of Rome would have made it miscarry had he set it on foot.[602]
The failure of Cesare Borgia, who of all Italians of his day came
nearest to combining the needed faculties for Italian unification, is
the proof of the practical impossibility of that solution. But a
federation of States, it has been reasoned, was relatively feasible; why
then was it never attempted? As usual, the question has been answered in
the simple verbalist way, by the decision that the Italians did not
strike out a political philosophy or science because they were not that
way given. They lacked the "faculty" for whatever they did not happen to
do; whereas the ancient Greeks, on the contrary, did theorise because
that faculty was theirs, though they had not the faculty to work out the
theories.

     _E.g._ the reasoning of so intelligent a thinker as Heeren: "Among
     those countries in which [political speculation] might have been
     expected to give the earliest sign of life, Italy was undoubtedly
     the first: all the ordinary causes appear to have united here; a
     number of small states arose near each other; republican
     constitutions were established; political parties were everywhere
     at work and at variance; and with all this, the arts and sciences
     were in the full splendour of their revival. The appearance of
     Italy in the fifteenth century recalls most fully the picture of
     ancient Greece. And yet in Italy, political theories were as few as
     in Greece they had been many!--a result both unexpected and
     difficult to explain. Still, however, I think that this phenomenon
     may be in great part accounted for, if we remember that there
     _never was_ a philosophical system of character or influence which
     prospered _under the sky of Italy_. No nation of civilised Europe
     has given birth to so few theories as the Italian: none has had
     less genius for such pursuits. The history of the Roman philosophy,
     a mere echo of the Grecian, proves this of its earlier ages, nor
     was it otherwise in its later." (Essay "On the Rise and Progress of
     Political Theories," in _Historical Treatises_, Eng. tr. 1836, p.
     118.)

     To say nothing of the looseness of the generalisation, which
     ignores alike Thomas Aquinas and Vico, Leonardo and Galileo,
     Machiavelli and Giordano Bruno, it may suffice to note once more
     that on this principle the Germans must be pronounced to have been
     devoid of theoretical faculty before Leibnitz. On that view it does
     not become any more intelligible how "they" acquired it.

Seeking a less vacuous species of explanation, we are soon led to
recognise (1) that the case of medieval Italy was to the extent of at
least two factors more complicated than that of ancient Greece; and that
these factors alone might suffice to explain their non-production of a
"theory" which should avail for the need; (2) that the theories of the
Greeks did not avail to solve their problem; and (3) that the Italians
all the while had really two theories too many. At the very emergence of
their republics they were already possessed or wrought upon by the
embodied theories of the Empire and the Papacy, two elements never
represented in the Greek problem, where empire was an alien and
barbarian thing suddenly entering into the affairs of civilised Hellas,
and where there was nothing in the nature of the Papacy. These two
forces in Italian life were all along represented by specific theories;
and their clash was a large part of the trouble. Their pressure set up a
chronic clash of parties; and the theorist of to-day may be challenged
to frame a theory which could have worked well for Italy otherwise than
by setting those forces aside--a thing quite impossible in the Middle
Ages. If mere system-making on either side could have availed, Thomas
Aquinas might have rendered the service.[603]

The economic and political destiny of the Church may be said to have
been determined in the eleventh century, when, after a desperate
struggle, begun by Pope Hildebrandt, celibacy was forced on the secular
clergy. The real motive to this policy was of course not ascetic but
economic, the object being to prevent at once the appropriation of
church property by married priests for family purposes, and the creation
of hereditary titles to church benefices. An evolution of that kind had
actually begun; and there can be no question that had it not been
checked it would have been fatal to the Papacy. Naturally the married
clergy on their part resisted to the uttermost. Only the desperate
policy of Hildebrandt, withdrawing popular obedience and ecclesiastical
protection from those who would not give up their wives, broke down the
resistance; and even thereafter Urban II, as we saw, had to resort to
the odious measure of making priests' wives slaves.[604] From that
period we may date the creation of the Church as a unitary political
power. Sacerdotal celibacy took many generations to establish; but when
once the point was carried it involved a force of incorporation which
only the strongest political forces--as at the Reformation--could outdo,
and which since the Reformation has kept the Church intact.

     It is true that the monk Arnold of Brescia, burned alive by the
     Papacy in 1155, fought a long battle (1139-55) against the papal
     power, creating an immense ferment in Lombardy, and rousing a
     strong anti-papal movement in Rome itself (Sismondi, _RŽpubliques
     italiennes_, i, chs. 7, 8; Gibbon, ch. 69); and that, as noted by
     M'Crie (_Reformation in Italy_, p. 1), "the supremacy claimed by
     the bishops of Rome was resisted in Italy after it had been
     submitted to by the most remote churches of the west"; but once
     papalised, Italy necessarily remained so in her own pecuniary
     interest. Cp. Rogers, _Economic Interpretation of History_, p. 79.
     Arnold's movement led even to a revolution in Rome; but after he
     had ruled there for ten years, overbearing two successive popes,
     one of greater energy, Adrian IV, excommunicated the city, so
     expelling Arnold. Adrian then, making a bargain with the emperor
     Frederick Barbarossa at his coronation, got the republican leader
     in his power; and the movement ended with Arnold's life. The Papacy
     was now an irremovable element of division in Italy; and disunion
     was thenceforth the lot of the land.

If we seek to localise the disease, however, we find that no one factor
is specially responsible. The alien emperor, coming in from outside, and
setting city against city, Pavia against Milan, and nobles against
burghers, is clearly a force of strife. Again, whereas the cities might
on the whole have combined successfully against the emperor, to the
point of abolishing his rule, the Papacy, calling him in to suit its own
purposes, and calling in yet other aliens at a pinch, is still more a
force of discord. At times the emperors, in the worst days of Roman
corruption, had to choose among the competitors nominated to the Papacy
by the intrigues of courtesans and nobles and the venal votes of the
people, thus identifying the man they chose with their cause.
Hildebrandt, again, after securing that the popes should be elected by
the cardinals, became the fiercest of autocrats. By his strife with
Henry IV he set up civil war through all Italy and Germany; and when in
his despair he called in the Normans against Rome, they sold most of the
people into slavery.[605] Later, in the minority of Frederick II,
Innocent III so strengthened the Church that it was able by sheer
slaughter to crush for a generation all Provenal heresy, and was able
to prevail against Frederick in its long struggle with him; in so doing,
however, deepening to the uttermost the passion of faction in all the
cities, and so preparing the worst and bloodiest wars of the future.

Yet, on the other hand, if we make abstraction of pope and emperor, and
consider only the nobles and the citizens, it is clear that they had
among them the seeds of strife immeasurable. The nobles were by training
and habit centres of violence.[606] Their mutual feuds, always tending
to involve the citizens, were a perpetual peril to order; and their
disregard of law kept them as ready to make war on citizens or cities as
on each other. Again and again they were violently expelled from every
Lombard city, on the score of their gross and perpetual disorders; but
they being the chief experts in military matters, they were always
welcomed back again, because the burghers had need of them as leaders in
the feuds of city with city, and of Guelphs with Ghibellines. So that
yet again, if we put the nobles out of sight, the spirit of strife as
between city and city was sufficient, as in ancient Greece, to make them
all the prey of any invader with a free hand. They could not master the
science of their problem, could not rise above the plane of primary
tribal or local passion and jealousy; though within each city were
faction hatreds as bitter as those between the cities as wholes. Already
in the twelfth century we find Milan destroying Lodi and unwalling Como.
Later, in the thirteenth century, Genoa ruins the naval power of
Pisa,[607] then under the tyranny of Ugolino, in a war of commercial
hatred, such as Pisa had before waged with Amalfi and with Lucca; in the
fourteenth, Genoa and Venice again and again fight till both are
exhausted, and Genoa accepts a lord to aid her in the struggle, Pisa
doing likewise, and so recovering strength on land;[608] in the
fifteenth and sixteenth, Florence spares no cost or effort to keep Pisa
in subjection. This fatal policy, in turn, was the result of the
frequent attempts of the Pisans to destroy Florentine trade by closing
their port to it.[609] All along, inter-civic hates are in full flow
through all the wars of Guelphs and Ghibellines; and the menace of
neither French nor Spanish tyranny can finally unify the mutually
repellent communities.

We may, indeed, make out a special case against the Papacy, to the
effect that, but for that, Italian intelligence would have had a freer
life; and that even if Italy, like Spain and France and England,
underwent despotism in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, her
intellectual activity would have sufficed to work her recovery at least
as rapidly as the process took place elsewhere. It has been argued[610]
that the liberating force elsewhere in the sixteenth century was the
Reformation--a theory which leaves us asking what originated the
Reformation in its turn. Taking that to be the spirit of (_a_) inchoate
free thought, of developing reason, or (_b_) of economic revolt against
the fiscal exactions of an alien power, or both, we are entitled to say
broadly that the crushing of such revolt in Italy, as in Provence and in
Spain, clearly came of the special development of the papal power thus
near its centre--the explanation of "national character" being as
nugatory in this as in any other sociological issue.

     Heeren naturally rests on this solution. The "new religion," he
     says, "was suited to the north, but not to the south. The calm and
     investigating spirit of the German nations found in it the
     nourishment which it required and sought for.... The more vivid
     imagination and sensitive feelings of the people of the south ...
     found little to please them in its tenets.... It was not,
     therefore, owing to the prohibitions of the government, but to the
     character of the nations themselves, that the Reformation found no
     support among them" (vol. cited, pp. 58, 59). The two explanations
     of climate and race can thus be employed alternatively at need.
     Ireland, though "northern," is to be got rid of as not being
     "German." For the rest, the Albigenses, the _paterini_, the
     reforming Franciscans, and the myriad victims of the Inquisition in
     Spain, are conveniently ignored. Heeren's phrase about the "almost
     total exclusion" of the southern countries from the "great ferment
     of ideas which in other countries of civilised Europe gave activity
     and life to the human intellect" can be described only as a piece
     of concentrated misinformation. And a similar judgment must be
     passed on the summing-up of Mr. Symonds that "Germany achieved the
     labour of the Reformation almost single-handed" (_Renaissance in
     Italy_, 2nd ed. i, 28). There is far more truth in the verdict of
     Guizot, that "la principale lutte d'Žrudition et de doctrine contre
     l'Eglise catholique a ŽtŽ soutenue par la rŽforme franaise; c'est
     en France et en Hollande, et toujours en franais, qu'ont ŽtŽ
     Žcrits tants d'ouvrages philosophiques, historiques, polŽmiques, ˆ
     l'appui de cette cause" (_Civilisation en France_, i, 18). Motley,
     though an uncritical Teutophile and Gallophobe, admits as to
     Holland that "the Reformation first entered the Provinces, not
     through the Augsburg but the Huguenot gate" (_Rise of the Dutch
     Republic_, ed. 1863, p. 162). As to the spirit of reformation in
     Italy and Spain, the student may consult the two careful and
     learned _Histories_ of M'Crie, works which might have saved many
     vain generalisations by later writers, had they heeded them. The
     question of the supposed racial determination of the Reformation is
     discussed at some length in _The Saxon and the Celt_, pp. 92-97,
     143-47, 203, 204. Cp. _The Dynamics of Religion_, 1897, pt. i;
     _Letters on Reasoning_, 2nd ed. 1905, pp. 20-24; and _A Short
     History of Freethought_, vol. i, chs. ix, x, xi.

The history of Italian religious life shows that the spirit of sheer
reformation in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries was stronger there
than even in France in the sixteenth, where again it was perhaps
positively stronger than in Germany, though not stronger relatively to
the resistance. And in Italy the resistance was personified in the
Papacy, which there had its seat and strength. When all is said,
however, the facts remain that in England the Reformation meant sordid
spoliation, retrogression in culture, and finally civil war; that in
France it meant long periods of furious strife; that in Germany, where
it "prospered," it meant finally a whole generation of the most ruinous
warfare the modern world had seen, throwing back German civilisation a
full hundred years. Save for the original agony of conquest and the
special sting of subjection to alien rule, Italy suffered in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries less evils than these.

The lesson of our retrospect, then, is: (1) generally, that as between
medieval Italian development and that of other countries--say our
own--there has been difference, not of "race character" and "faculty,"
but of favouring and adverse conditions; and (2) particularly, that
certain social evils which went on worsening in Florence and are in some
degree present in all societies to-day, call for scientific treatment
lest they go on worsening with us. The modern problem is in many
respects different from that of pre-Reformation Italy; but the forces
concerned are kindred, and it may be worth while to note the broad facts
of the past process with some particularity.


¤ 2

The central fact of disunion in Italian life, complicated as we have
seen it to be by extraneous factors, analyses down to the eternal
conflict of interests of the rich and the poor, the very rich and the
less rich, or, as Italian humour figured it, the "fat" and the "lean."
For Machiavelli this is the salient trouble in the Florentine
retrospect, since it survived the feuds of Guelph and Ghibelline; though
he sets down to the Papacy the foreign invasions and the disunion of the
cities. The faction-feuds, of course, tell of the psychological
conditions of the feud of rich and poor, and were to some extent an
early form of the feud,[611] the imperialist Ghibellines being
originally the more aristocratic faction; while the papalist Guelphs, by
the admission of Machiavelli, were the more friendly to the popular
liberties, that being the natural course for the Papacy to take. The
imperial cause, on the other hand, was badly compromised by the tyranny
of the terrible Ezzelino III, the representative of Frederick II in the
Trevisan March, who ruled half-a-dozen cities in a fashion never
exceeded for cruelty in the later ages of Italian tyranny.[612] Whatever
democratic feeling there was must needs be on the other side.

After Florence had recast its constitution at the death of Frederick
II, establishing twelve _anziani_ or magistrates, replaced every two
months, and two foreign judges--one the upper-class _podestˆ_ and the
other the captain of the people[613]--to prevent grounds of quarrel,
matters were in fair train, and the city approved its unity by the
sinister steps of forcing Pistoia, Arezzo, and Siena to join its
confederation, capturing Volterra, and destroying several villages,
whose inhabitants were deported to Florence. But new plots on behalf of
Manfred led to the expulsion of the Ghibellines, who in turn, getting
the upper hand with no sense of permanence, reasoned that to make their
party safe they must destroy the city; a purpose changed, as the
familiar story goes, only by the protest of the Florentine Ghibelline
chief, Farinata degli Uberti. They then tried, in obvious bad faith, the
expedient of conciliating the people, whom they had always hitherto
oppressed, by giving them a quasi-democratic constitution, in which the
skilled workers were recognised as bodies, to which all citizens had to
belong.[614] But this scheme being accompanied by fresh taxation, the
Ghibellines were driven out by force; and once more the Guelphs, now
backed by Charles of Anjou (1266), organised a government of twelve
magistrates, adding a council of twenty-four upper-class citizens,
called the _credenza_, and yet another body of 180 popular deputies,
thirty for each of the six quarters of the city, making up with the
others a Council General. To this, however, was strangely added yet
another council of 120, charged with executive functions. The purpose
was to identify the Guelph cause with that of the people--that is, the
lower _bourgeoisie_ and skilled artisans; and the property of the exiled
Ghibellines was confiscated and divided among the public treasury, the
heads of the ruling party, and the Guelphs in general. At this stage the
effort of Gregory X, at his election, to effect a restoration of the
Ghibellines and a general reconciliation, naturally failed. Yet when his
successor, Nicolas III, persisted in the anti-French policy, he was able
through his northern legate to persuade the city, suffering from the
lawlessness of the Guelph as of old from that of the Ghibelline nobles,
to recall the latter and set up a new constitution of fourteen
governors, seven of each party, all nominated by the Pope--a system
which lasted ten years. Then came another French interregnum;
whereafter, on the fall of the French rule in Sicily in 1282, there was
set up yet another constitution of compromise. For the council of
fourteen was set up one of three _priori delle arti_, heads of the
crafts--a number immediately raised to six, so as to give one prior to
each ward of the city, with a change in the title to _signoria_. These
were to be elected every two months. The system, aristocratic in respect
of its small governing body, yet by its elective method lent itself
peculiarly to the new _bourgeois_ tendencies; and thenceforward, says
Machiavelli, we find the parties of Guelph and Ghibelline in Florence
supplanted by the simpler enmity of rich and poor. Soon many of the
nobles, albeit Guelph, were driven out of the city, or declared
disqualified for priorship on the score of their past disorders; and
outside they set up new feuds.

While Florence thus held out, other cities sought safety in
one-man-power, choosing some noble as "captain of the people" and
setting him above the magistrates. Thus Pagano della Torre, a Guelph,
became war-lord of Milan, and his brothers succeeded him, till the
office came to be looked on as hereditary, and other cities inclined to
choose the same head. And so astutely egotistic was the action of all
the forces concerned, that when the Guelph house of Della Torre thus
became unmanageably powerful, the Papacy did not scruple to appoint to
the archbishopric of Milan an exiled Ghibelline, Visconti.
"Henceforward," says Sismondi, "the rivalry between the families of
Della Torre and Visconti made that between the people and the nobles
almost forgotten." The Visconti finally defeated the other faction, made
Milan Ghibelline, and became its virtual rulers.

On the other hand, the entrance of a French army under Charles of Anjou,
called in by a French pope to conquer the Ghibelline realm of the Two
Sicilies (1266), put a due share of wrong to the account of the Guelphs,
the French power standing for something very like barbarism. Its first
achievement was to exterminate the Saracen name and religion in Sicily.
On its heels came a new irruption from Germany, in the person of
Conradin, the claimant of the imperial succession, to whom joined
themselves Pisa and Siena, in opposition to their big neighbour and
enemy Florence, and the people of Rome itself, at quarrel with their
Pope, who had left the city for Viterbo. By Conradin's defeat the French
power became paramount; and then it was that the next pope, Gregory X,
sought to restore the Ghibellines as counterpoise: a policy pursued by
his successor, to the end, however, of substituting (1278) papal for
imperial claims over Italy. Even Florence at his wish recalled her
Ghibellines. But then came the forced election of another French pope,
who acted wholly in the French interest, and re-exiled everywhere the
Ghibellines: a process speedily followed in turn by the "Sicilian
Vespers," involving the massacre and expulsion of the French, and
introducing a Spanish king as representative of the imperial line. Again
the Papacy encouraged the other power, relieving Charles II, as King of
Naples, from his treaty oath, and set him upon making a war with Sicily,
which dragged for twenty-four years. Such were the main political
features of the Italy of Dante. The Papacy, becoming a prize of the
leading Roman families, played a varying game as between the two
monarchies of the south and their partisans in the north; and the minor
cities, like the greater, underwent chronic revolutions. Still, so
abundant was the Italian outflow of intellectual and inventive energy,
so substantial was the general freedom of the cities, and so soundly was
the average regimen founded on energetic agriculture and commerce, that
wealth abounded on all hands.

With the new French invasion (1302) under Charles of Valois, called in
by Boniface VIII to aid him against Sicily, a partially new stage
begins. Charles was received at Florence as the typical Guelph; but,
being counselled by the pope to pacify Tuscany to his own advantage,
allied himself with the ultra-Guelphs, the _Neri_, gave up to plunder,
the proceeds of which he pocketed, the houses of the other or
pro-Ghibelline faction, the _Bianchi_, and enforced the execution or
exile of its leading men, including Dante. Then came the election of a
strictly French pope and his establishment at Avignon. A new lease being
now given to faction, the cities rapidly lapsed into the over-lord
system as the only means of preserving order; and when in 1316 a new
emperor, Henry VII, presented himself for homage and claimed to place an
imperial vicar in each city, most were well disposed to agree. When
however Henry, like Charles, showed himself mainly bent on plunder,
demanding 100,000 florins from Milan and 60,000 from Genoa, he destroyed
his prestige. He had insisted on the recall of all exiles of either
party; but all united against his demands, save the Pisans, who had sent
him 60,000 florins in advance. His sudden death, on his way to fight the
forces of Naples, left everything in a new suspense, save that Pisa,
already shorn of maritime power, was soon eclipsed, after setting up a
military tyranny as a last resort.

The _rŽgime_ of the local tyrant now rapidly developed. On the fall of
the Pisan tyrant rose that of Lucca, Castruccio Castracani, the great
type, after Ezzelino, of the Italian despot-adventurer of the
Renaissance. Such a leader was too dangerous an antagonist to such a
corporation as that of Florence--once more (1323) reconstructed on an
upper-class basis, with a scrutinised franchise, election by ballot, and
a more complicated system of offices than ever.[615] To command them
against Castruccio, they called in the Catalonian general Cardona, who
utterly failed them. He took the course of so handling and placing his
troops as to force those citizens in the army who could afford it to buy
leave of absence, and was finally defeated with his wilfully weakened
army. Florence was driven to call in the King of Naples, at the price of
conferring the _signoria_ on his son. Meanwhile the new emperor Ludwig,
called in by Castruccio, plundered the Milanese and imprisoned their
lords, the Visconti, who had been of his own party; extorted 150,000
florins from the Pisans; tortured, to extort treasure, a Ghibelline who
had given up to him a fortress in the papal State; and generally showed
the Italians, before he withdrew, that a German tyrant could beat even a
native at once in treachery, cruelty, and avarice. Castruccio and the
son of the King of Naples, who had proved a bad bargain, died about the
same time as did the reigning Visconti at Milan, the reigning tyrant at
Mantua, and Can' Grande of Verona, the successor of Ezzelino, who had
conquered Padua. Again the encouraged middle class of Florence recast
their constitution (1328), annulling the old councils and electing two
new: a Council of the "People," composed of 300 middle-class citizens,
and a Council of the Commune, composed of 250 of both orders. Elsewhere
the balance inclined to anarchy and despotism, as of old. A new emperor,
John of Bohemia, offered (1330) a new chance of pacification, eagerly
welcomed, to a harassed people, in large part shaken by military dangers
in its devotion to republicanism, and weary of local tyrannies. But
against the new imperialism Florence stoutly held out, with the aid of
Lombard Ghibellines; the new emperor, leaving Italy, sold his influence
everywhere to local tyrants, and once more everything was in suspense.

At length, in 1336, there occurred the new phenomenon of a combination
between Florence and Venice against a new tyrant of Padua and Lucca, who
had betrayed Florence; but the Venetians in turn did the same thing,
leaving the Florentines half a million of florins in debt; whereupon
they were attacked by their old enemies the Pisans, who heavily defeated
them and captured Lucca, for which Florence had been fighting. It was in
this stage of demoralisation that the Florentines (1342) suddenly forced
their _signoria_ to give the war-lordship to the French Gaultier de
Brienne, "Duke of Athens," formerly the right-hand man of the son of the
King of Naples, who had now been sent to them as a new commander by that
king, on the request of the Commission of Twenty charged with the war.
The commission elected him to the sole command in order to save
themselves[616] and pacify the people; and his natural associates, the
old nobility, counselled him to seize the government, which he gradually
did, beheading and exiling the discredited middle-class leaders, and so
winning the support of the populace, who, on his putting himself for
open election to the _signoria_ for one year, acclaimed him to the
function for life. To this pass had come the see-saw of middle class
(_popolo_) and upper class, with a populace held in pupilage.

     Sismondi, in his _Short History_, pp. 147, 148, seems to represent
     the episode as wholly one of wanton popular caprice and venality,
     even representing that Duke Gaultier was only by chance in the
     city. The narrative of Machiavelli explicitly sets forth how he
     came through the appeal of the Commission of Twenty; how the
     nobility and some of the _bourgeoisie_ conspired with him; and how
     the populace were worked upon by the conspirators. The public
     acclamation, bad as it was, had been carefully subsidised. The
     middle class, whose war policy, however, had brought the city into
     such danger, were far more guilty than the mostly unenfranchised
     populace. Sismondi had latterly an undue faith in the principle of
     middle-class rule. (Cp. Mr. Boulting's Memoir in his recast of the
     _RŽpubliques_, p. xxiv.) In his _Histoire des rŽpubliques
     italiennes_ (v, 329-53) he sets forth the financial corruption of
     the middle-class rulers (p. 330), and recognises that they and the
     aristocrats were alike dangerous to liberty. Cp. as to his change
     of front, F. Morin, _Origines de la dŽmocratie_, 3e Ždit. 1865,
     introd. pp. 17-18.

Within a year, partly on the sudden pressure of a scarcity, the tyrant
was overthrown, after having wrung from Florence 400,000 florins and
infuriated all classes against him and his race. Not the least of his
offences was his conclusion of a peace with Pisa, by which she for a
given period was to rule over Lucca. The rising against him was
universal. Three of his henchmen were literally torn to pieces with
hands and teeth: a madness of fury which was only too profoundly in
keeping with the self-abandonment that had placed the tyrant in power.
The political organism was beginning to disintegrate. A new constitution
was set up, with a leaning to aristocracy, which was soon upset by the
middle class, who in turn established yet another. The nobles, believing
the populace to be hostile to the _bourgeoisie_, attempted anew a
revolution, and were utterly crushed. And now began, according to the
greatest of the publicists of the Renaissance, the final enfeeblement of
Florence, in that the ruin of the nobility, whose one merit had been
their fighting power, led to the abandonment of all military
exercise.[617] Yet Florence a generation later made vigorous war under a
"committee," and in the meantime at least the city tasted domestic peace
and grew in civilisation. And though we doubtless exaggerate when we
conceive of a transition from what we are apt to figure as the fierce
and laughterless Florence of Dante to the gay Florence of the Medici, it
is hard to hold that life was worsened when men changed the ways which
made them collectively capable of rending with their teeth the carcases
of those they hated, and which left the Viscontis of Milan capable of
torturing their political prisoners to death through forty days.

Still the process of disintegration and reintegration proceeded. The
tyrants of the smaller cities usually established themselves by the aid
of professional mercenaries, German and other, whom, when their funds
failed, they turned loose to shift for themselves, having in the
meantime disarmed the citizens. These companies, swelled by others
disbanded after the English wars in France, ravaged and plundered Italy
from Montferrat to Naples, and were everywhere bought off save by
Florence. Only the Pope and the greater tyrants could keep them
regularly in pay; and by their means the Viscontis became lords of
sixteen cities of Lombardy, while the Papacy began to build up a
military power. Naples, on the other hand, continuously degenerated;
while Genoa and Venice exhausted each other in deadly strife for the
commercial monopoly of the East; and Pisa leaned to the Viscontis, who
ultimately obtained its headship.

Rome, popeless, and domineered over by warring nobles, had its brief
vision of a republic under the dreamer Cola di Rienzi, who at last fell
by the hand of the masses whom he had for a brief space hypnotised.
Neither he nor they were meet for the destiny they fain would have
fulfilled; and had people and leader alike been worthier, they would
ultimately have failed to master the forces joined against them.
Rienzi's brief, and on some sides remarkably vigorous, administration in
1346-47 was not wholly unworthy of his ideal of "the good estate"; he
seems, indeed, to have ruled the Roman territory with an efficiency that
recalled the ancient State; and his early successes against the nobles
tell of unexpected weakness on their side and energy on that of the
people. His dream of an Italian federation, too, remains to prove that
he was no mere mob-leader. But had he been as stable in purpose and
policy as he was heady and capricious, and had the Roman populace been
as steadfast as it was turbulent, the forces of division represented by
the nobles and the Papacy would ultimately have overthrown any
republican polity. What Florence could not compass, Rome could not
maintain. Two centuries before, Arnold of Brescia had fallen, after
fifteen years of popularity, as soon as pope and emperor joined hands
against him; and the papalism of Rienzi was as fatal to him as
anti-papalism had been to Arnold. Had Rienzi had his way, the Pope would
have at once returned to Rome; and where the Papacy was, no republic
could endure, however strong and sober were its head. And Rienzi was not
sober. After his overthrow in 1347 and his seven years of wandering
exile, he was restored solely by the choice and as the agent of the Pope
at Avignon; and his death in a tumult after four months of renewed
office was the end of his cause.

In Florence the disintegration went on apace. A new emperor, Charles IV,
charged the city 100,000 florins (1355) for her immunities, leaving all
men hopeless as ever of the Empire as a political solution; and when the
crimes of the Viscontis drove cities and Papacy to call Charles in
against them (1368), he did but use the opportunity to levy blackmail
wherever he went. Later (1375), the Papacy combined with Florence
against the reigning Visconti, but only to betray its ally. And now
occurred what for a time must have seemed a vital revolution in Italian
affairs; the infuriated Florentines suddenly allying themselves with
Visconti, the enemy of the day before, against the treacherous Pope, and
framing a league with Siena, Lucca, and Pisa against the Church that
Florence had so long sustained. Eighty towns in ten days drove out their
legates; and furious reprisals broke out on all hands, till the very
Pope at Avignon was fain to come to stay the universal warfare. Now,
however, an aristocratic and papalist party in Florence bitterly opposed
"The Eight" who managed the war, the aristocracy having gravitated to
the papal side; and at length exhaustion and the absolute instability
of all alliances brought about a peace in which most of the cities,
freed from the Papacy--now become an affair of two mutually
anathematising heads--fell once more under local tyrants. In the hour of
extreme need the Papacy was, if possible, a worse influence than the
emperor; nowhere was to be found a force of stability save in the
tyrannies, which were merely unstable with a difference.

Florence, still republican and still obstinately prosperous, stood as a
strange anomaly in the general transformation. But she had now reached
the stage when the long-ignored populace--the multitude beneath the
_popolo_--made up of handworkers with no nominal incorporation or
franchise, was able to press its claims as against the other orders,
which in turn were divided, as of old, by the jealousies between the
major and minor middle-class guilds and between the new nobility of
capital and their former equals. Refused the status of incorporation,
the _ciompi_ ("chums" or "mates," from the French _compre_) made
_their_ insurrection in turn, finding for the nonce in a wool-carder a
leader of the best quality the time could show, who carried his point,
was chosen head magistrate, enforced order among his own partisans, and
established a new magistracy, with three representatives of the major
arts, three of the minor (1378).

     Among other things, the _ciompi_ demanded that interest should no
     longer be paid on the public debt; that the principal be paid off
     in twelve years, and that no "small people" should be sued for
     debts under fifty florins for the next two years (see Trollope, ii,
     216). The trouble was that the brains in the movement, good as they
     were, could not permanently control the spirit of riot. Sismondi,
     after arguing (_Short History_, p. 182) in the Whig manner that
     "those who have not learnt to think, those to whom manual labour
     leaves no time for meditation, ought not to undertake the guidance
     of their fellow-citizens," amusingly proceeds (p. 185) to point to
     the capacity of Lando as showing "how much a free government
     spreads sound sense and elevated sentiments among even the lowest
     classes of society." Immediately afterwards he has to record how
     the upper classes fell into fresh disorders.

But where the educated burgesses and nobles had failed in the science of
self-government, the mass of untrained toilers[618] could not succeed.
Suborned doubtless by the other classes, they rebelled against the man
whom they had made leader, and were by him promptly and capably
suppressed, many being exiled; whereupon in due course he was himself
deprived of his post by the old parties, and the new order was annulled
(1382). After fresh strifes and proscriptions among the aristocracy
themselves, all traces of the popular rising were effaced, and the
aristocracy of wealth was definitely re-established.

What had happened was the attainment of the capitalistic stage and the
enthronement of capital in the republican State. In place of strifes
between wealth and nobility there had arisen the strife of capital and
labour, the new aristocracy of wealth having in large part taken the
place of that of descent. The latter transition had occurred nearly
simultaneously in the other remaining Republics. Genoa had substituted
factions with the names of new wealthy families for the old. In Siena,
where the _bourgeoisie_ dispossessed the nobles, they were in turn
assailed by "reformers" of the lower class, who were finally defeated in
battle and exiled wholesale (1385). Meantime the hereditary tyrants of
Milan, the Visconti, with their singular continuity of capacity, had
grown stronger than ever, had built up a native and scientific military
system, and more than ever menaced all their neighbours. Florence called
in aid successively from Germany and France (1390-91); but the Milanese
army triumphed over all; and the skilled adventurer Sir John Hawkwood,
the hired general of the Florentine troops, could not hold his ground.
The Emperor, as usual, was satisfied to take payment for
non-intervention; and the reigning Visconti, Gian Galeazza, invested by
the Emperor with the titles of Duke of Mantua and Count of Pavia, and
the lordship of twenty-six cities, had by the year 1402 further
compassed, by all manner of fraud and force, the mastery of Pisa,
Perugia, Genoa, Siena, Lucca, and Bologna, dying of the plague at the
height of his power. His sons being boys, his power broke up among his
generals, to be in large part recovered later, however, by his second
son, who first assassinated the elder.

At this stage Venice once more intervenes, taking up the cause of Verona
against the tyrant of Padua, whom, having defeated him by her
carefully-chosen and supervised mercenaries, she put to death (1406). He
had been the ally of Florence; but Florence let him fall, being now
wholly bent on reconquering Pisa, her natural seaport. Pisa, in turn,
always invincibly opposed to Florentine rule, was on commercial grounds
backed by Genoa, now under the nominal rule of a representative of the
King of France, who, however, sought to sell Pisa to the Florentines,
and did receive from them 200,000 florins. Still resisting, the Pisans
recalled an exile to lead them; and he in turn sold them for 50,000
florins, this time to their complete undoing. Refusing all Florentine
favours, the bulk of the ruling middle-class abandoned the city for
ever, taking much of its special commerce with them. Meantime, the
kingdom of Naples, under an energetic king, Ladislaus, had acquired most
of the States of the distracted Church, menaced Florence, and was
pressing her hard, despite French support, when Ladislaus died (1414).
By this time the new Visconti was establishing himself at Milan by means
of mercenaries, commanded for him by well-chosen captains. Six times
were the Florentines defeated by his forces; till his capable general,
Carmagnola, whom he had disgraced, revealed to the Council of Venice his
master's intention to attack them; and Venice joined Florence to crush
the tyrant. Carmagnola, acting slackly, met ill success, and was
therefore executed by his Venetian masters. But the Visconti too finally
died defeated, leaving his power to a new adventurer, Francesco Sforza,
who had married his daughter, and had fought both for and against him in
the endless imbroglio of Italian conspiracy.

Florentine republicanism was now near its euthanasia. By the fatal law
of empire, the perpetual enterprise of destroying other men's freedom
left Florence unfit to use or to defend her own; and the tyrants of Pisa
became meet for the yoke of tyranny. The family of Medici, growing
rapidly rich, began to use the power of capital as elsewhere less astute
adventurers used the power of the sword. From the overthrow of the
_ciompi_ party in 1382 to 1434, the Republic had been ruled by a faction
of the new commercial aristocracy with substantial unity; and the period
is claimed as the most prosperous, intellectually and materially, though
not the most progressive, in Florentine history.

     See above, p. 226-27. Perrens (_Histoire de Florence_, trans.
     cited, pp. 171-72, 202) thinks otherwise, but does not blame the
     oligarchy. Sismondi, in his larger and earlier work (_RŽpubliques_,
     ed. 1826, xi, 2), represents that Florence _ceased_ to be great
     under the Medici; cp. however, xii, 52, and the different note in
     the reactionary _Short History_ (p. 224), where he deems that in
     this period were born and formed "all those great men" whose glory
     is credited to the Medici. This holds good of Brunelleschi the
     architect, Masallio the artist, and Ghiberti the sculptor, as well
     as of Poggio and other scholars. Cp. Zeller, _Histoire d'Italie_,
     1853, p. 309, and the list given by Perrens, _Histoire de
     Florence_, trans. cited, p. 456. M. Perrens pronounces that under
     Lorenzo "the decadence of sculpture is visible, and still more that
     of architecture," both being too rapidly produced from motives of
     gain (_La civilisation florentine du 13e sicle au 16e_, 1893, p.
     190). Here he follows Romohr (see _Histoire de Florence_, last
     cited). Lorenzo, he notes, had the reactionary belief, odd on the
     part of a merchant, that only nobles could produce perfect work,
     they only having the necessary leisure. He accordingly ignored all
     plebeian genius, such as that of Leonardo da Vinci.

Cosimo de' Medici, descendant of a democrat, was grown too rich to be
one in his turn; and between him and the Albizzi, who led the ruling
faction, there grew up one of the old and typical jealousies of
power-seekers. Exiled by a packed _balia_, Cosimo's wealth enabled him
to turn the tables in a year and exile his exilers, taking their place
and silently absorbing their power. "The moment was come when the credit
of the Medici was to prevail over the legal power of the Florentine
_signoria_." Thus when the Visconti died, Cosimo and the doge of Venice
combined their forces to prevent the recovery of the republican
independence of Milan, whose middle class, divided by their own
jealousies, speedily succumbed to the fraud and force of Sforza, the
Visconti's heir.

For thirty years Cosimo maintained at Florence, by the power of capital,
prosperity and peace under the semblance of the old constitution, the
richer of the ever-renewed capitalist class accepting his primacy, while
the populace, being more equitably governed than of yore under the old
nobility, and being steadily prosperous, saw no ground for revolt.
Capital as "tyrant" had in fact done what the tyrants of early Greece
and Rome are presumed to have often done--favoured the people as against
the aristocracy; Cosimo's liberality giving employment and pay at the
same time to the artisans and to the scholars. Under Cosimo and his
political colleagues, doubtless, the subject cities were corruptly
governed; but Florence seems to have been discreetly handled. Attempts
to break the capitalistic domination came to nothing, save the exile or
at a pinch the death of the malcontents.

     [Under all of the Medici, it appears, "the fiscal legislation
     adhered to the principle of burdening the old nobility of the city"
     (Von Reumont, _Lorenzo de' Medici_, Eng. tr. i, 33). They however
     built up a fresh public debt, and their finance had very crooked
     aspects, especially under Lorenzo, who lacked the mercantile
     faculty of his grandfather (_id._ pp. 31-33. Cp. Perrens, _Histoire
     de Florence_, trans. cited, pp. 55-60, 288, 408-13, 416-17).
     Lorenzo was even accused of appropriating the dowries of orphan
     girls; and it seems clear that he defrauded the _monte delle doti_,
     or dowry bank.

     As regards fiscal policy, it may be interesting to note that in
     Florence taxes had been imposed alternately on capital or income
     from the thirteenth century onwards, both being taken at the lowest
     values, and rated at from one-half to three per cent. according to
     the _estimo_ (Esquiron de Parieu, _TraitŽ des imp™ts_, 2e Ždit.
     1866, i, 417). These taxes in turn were probably suggested by the
     practice of ancient Athens, where extraordinary revenue for war
     purposes was obtained "partly from voluntary contributions, partly
     from a graduated income or property tax." In 1266 a fresh
     income-tax of ten per cent. on an already heavily taxed city
     incited the decisive rising against the rule of the Ghibelline
     Count Guido. The earlier historians of Florence, like most others,
     pay little attention to the history of taxation; but details emerge
     for the later period.

     In 1427 Giovanni de' Medici imposed on Florence a tax called the
     _catasto_--apparently not, like earlier taxes of the same name,
     based on a survey of land, but on disposable or movable
     capital--and also one of 1/2 per cent. on income over what was
     necessary to support life. Further, he levied a super-tax, which
     was paid by 1,400 citizens out of the 10,000 who came under the
     _catasto_. At a pinch, the _catasto_ was levied several times in
     the year. Yet further, a regularly graduated income-tax was imposed
     by Cosimo de' Medici, in 1441, and raised in 1443; but, in this
     case, the salutary principle of sparing the amount of income
     necessary to sustain life seems to have been departed from, since
     incomes of from one to fifty florins paid 4 per cent., the rate
     gradually rising thereafter to 33-1/3 per cent. for incomes over
     1,500 florins. By reason of bad finance, further, taxes had now to
     be levied even ten and fifteen times a year. Cp. Perrens, as last
     cited. It is yet further noteworthy that, from 1431 to 1458,
     traders were required to show their books to the revenue officers
     for the purpose of fair assessment. The abandonment of this
     provision seems to have been partly due to the evasions practised
     by the traders, partly to the irritation and the abuses set up by
     it.]

At Cosimo's death there was dynastic strife of capital, as elsewhere of
blood; but the blundering financier Pitti went to the wall, and the
invalid Piero de' Medici kept his father's power. At his death the group
of his henchmen kept their hold on it; and in time his son Lorenzo
ousted them and engrossed all, escaping the plot which was fatal to his
brother. The failure of that and other plots, in Florence and elsewhere,
sufficed to prove that the artisans, well employed and protected by the
laws, had no concern to upset the orderly and business-like "tyranny"
either of one great capitalist or of a prince, in the interest of an
oligarchy which would rule no better, which gave them no more of
political privilege than did he, and which was less ready than he with
public gifts. Thus he had little difficulty in cutting down every
institution that restricted his power, whether popular or
oligarchic.[619] Italian republicanism had always been a matter of
either upper-class or middle-class rule; and when the old upper class of
feudal descent was superseded by one of commercial descent, the populace
had nothing to gain by supporting the bourgeoisie. A capitalistic
"lord," most of whose wealth was in its nature unseizable, was thus a
more stable power than any mere swordsman among swordsmen; and Lorenzo
de' Medici not only crushed all the conspiracies against him, but held
his own against the dangerous alliance of the republican Pope Sixtus IV
and the King of Naples--the menace of Turkish invasion helping him.
When, early in his reign, he joined in and carried through the plot for
the confiscation of Volterra, chiefly in order to secure a hold on its
rich alum mines, his popularity at Florence was in the ratio of the
baseness of his triumph. As always, imperialism and corruption went hand
in hand, and the Florentines ensured their own servitude by their
eagerness to compass the fall of others.[620]

After Lorenzo's death (1492) only the incompetence of his son Piero at
the hazardous juncture of the new French invasion under Charles VIII
could upset the now hereditary power of the house; but such incompetence
at such a crisis was sufficient, Savonarola having now set up a new
democratic force, partly analogous to that of Puritanism in the England
of a later age. The new party, however, brought no new political
science.[621] Republican Florence in its interim of self-government
proceeded as of old to make war on indomitable Pisa, with which it could
never consent to live on terms of equality. Time after time, vanquished
by force and treachery, the Pisans had again cast loose, fighting for
independence as fiercely as did their fathers of a previous generation.
Savonarola, who had no better light for this problem than was given to
the other Florentines of his age, "staked the truth of his inspiration
on the recovery of Pisa"; he had not a grain of sympathy for the Pisans,
and punished those who had;[622] and though his party had the wisdom to
proclaim a general amnesty for Florence (1495), the war against Pisa
went on, with the French king insensately admitted as a Florentine ally.
Savonarola in his turn fell, on his plain failure to evoke the
miraculous aid on the wild promise of which he had so desperately
traded; his party of pietists went to pieces; and the upper-class party
which succeeded carried on the war, destroying the Pisan harvests every
year, till, under the one-man command of Loderini, Florence triumphed
(1507), and the staunch sea-city fell once more. Even now the conquering
city consented to pay great bribes to the kings of France and Aragon for
leave to take her prey. And once more multitudes of Pisans emigrated,
refusing to live in subjection, despite all attempts at
conciliation.[623]

Slowly the monarchic powers closed in; France, after several campaigns,
decisively defeated and captured Lodovico Sforza, lord of Milan, and
proceeded by a secret treaty with Spain to partition the kingdom of
Naples--a rascals' bargain, which ended in a quarrel and in the
destruction of two French armies; Spain remaining master of Naples and
the Sicilies, while France held the Milanese and Liguria, including
Genoa. For a few years Cesare Borgia flared across the Italian sky, only
to fall with his great purposes unfulfilled; and still the foreign
powers encroached. France, with Swiss support, proceeded in turn to make
war on Venice; and the emperor, the pope, Spain, and the smaller
neighbouring despots, joined in the attack. Against these dastardly odds
the invincible oligarchy of Venice held out, till Pope Julius, finding
his barbarian friends worse than his Italian enemies, changed sides,
joined the republic, and after many reverses got together an anti-French
league of English, Swiss, and Spanish. Finally the emperor betrayed his
French allies, who were once more driven out of Italy, leaving their
ally, Florence, to fall into the hands of the Spaniards (1512).

Now came the restoration of the family of Medici, soon followed by the
elevation of Giovanni de' Medici to the Papacy as Leo X; whence came yet
more wars, enough to paralyse Italy financially had there been no other
impoverishing cause. But Leo X, now the chief Italian power, misgoverned
in secular affairs as badly as in ecclesiastical; and the wars, so
barbarous in themselves, were waged upon dwindling resources. Venice,
pressed afresh by Maximilian, made alliance with Louis, who was defeated
by the Swiss, as defenders and "lords" of Milan; whereupon the Spanish,
papal, and German forces successively ravaged the Venetian territories.
Francis I zealously renewed the war, grappled with the Swiss in the
desperate battle of Marignano in such sort as to get them to come to
terms, and compassed the sovereignty of Milan. On the succession of
Charles V to the throne of Spain and the Empire (1519), war between him
and Francis set in systematically, and continued under Adrian and
Clement VII as under Leo, both combatants feeding on and plundering
Italy. The defeat of Francis at Pavia (1525) brought no cessation to the
drain; a new league was formed between France, the Papacy, Venice, and
Sforza; and soon, besides the regular armies, a guerilla horde of
Germans on the imperial side, receiving no pay, was living by the
plunder of Lombardy. At length, in 1527, came the sack of Rome by the
imperial forces, Germans and Spanish combining for nine miserable months
to outdo the brutalities and the horrors of all previous conquests,
Christian or heathen. Two years' more fighting "only added to the
desolation of Italy, and destroyed alike in all the Italian provinces
the last remains of prosperity."[624] When a fresh German army entered
Lombardy, in 1529, there was "nothing more to pillage."[625]

The curtain now falls rapidly on every form of "independence" in Italy.
Pope Clement VII, freed of his barbarian conquerors, sent them against
Florence, which fell in a fashion not unworthy of its great republican
tradition, after tasting three final years of its ancient and
thrice-forfeited "freedom." With the dying Machiavelli to frame the
ordinances of her revived military system, and Michel Angelo to
construct her last fortifications, she had in her final effort bound up
with her name as a republic two of the greatest Italian names of the age
of the Renaissance. Then came the vengeance of the Medicean Pope,
Clement VII, the ducal tyranny, and the end of a great period.

The prolonged life of the maritime and commercial-aristocratic republics
of Genoa and Venice, interesting as a proof of the defensive powers of
communities so placed and so ordered, was no prolongation of Italian
civilisation, save in so far as a brilliant art survived at Venice till
the close of the sixteenth century. It is sufficient to note that what
of artistic and intellectual life Venice and Genoa had was dependent
first on Venetian contact with Byzantium, and later on the fecundity of
freer Italy. The mere longer duration of Venice was due as much to her
unique situation as to her system. On the other hand, it seems
substantially true that the Venetian oligarchy did rule its subjects,
both at home and on the mainland, with greater wisdom and fairness than
was shown by any other Italian power. When Castruccio Castracani drove
nine hundred families out of Lucca in 1310, thus destroying some of its
chief manufactures, Venice gave the silk-weavers among them a politic
encouragement, and so widened her commercial basis.[626] Her rulers, in
short, had the common sense of men of business, who knew the value of
goodwill. There is thus an unwarrantable extravagance in the verdict of
the young Macaulay, that in Venice "aristocracy had destroyed every seed
of genius and virtue";[627] and in his outburst: "God forbid that there
should ever again exist a powerful and civilised State which, after
existing through thirteen hundred eventful years, shall not bequeath to
mankind the memory of one great name or one generous action." Such
actions are not rife in any history, and in mere civic selfishness of
purpose the rulers of Venice were on a par with most others.[628] As
citizens, or as a caste, they seem to have been not more but less
self-seeking as against the rest of the community, despite their
determined exclusiveness, than the same class in other States.[629]
Their history does but prove that an astute oligarchy, protectively
governing a commercial and industrial State, is not helpful to
civilisation in the ratio of its power and stability, and that the
higher political wisdom is not the appanage of any class.

When all is said, the whole Italian civilisation of the Middle Ages and
the Renaissance represents a clear political gain over that of ancient
Hellas in that it had transcended slavery, while failing to attain or to
aim at the equality and fraternity which alone realise liberty. Despite,
too, all the scandals of the Renaissance in general, and of papal Rome
in particular, the life of such a city as Florence was morally quite on
a par with that of any northern city.[630] But the later States and
civilisations which, while so much more fortunate in their political
conditions, are still so far from the moral liberation of their
labouring masses--these are not entitled to plume themselves on their
comparative success. "The petty done" is still dwarfed by "the undone
vast."

What they and we may truly claim is that in the modern State, freed from
the primal curse of fratricidal strife between cities and provinces, the
totality of "good life," no less than of industrial and commercial life,
is far greater than of old, even if signal genius be less common. To
contrast the Genoa of to-day with the old City-State is to realise how
peace can liberate human effort. The city of Petrarch, Columbus, and
Mazzini has no recent citizen of European fame; but since a wealthy son
bequeathed to her his huge fortune (1875), she has become the chief port
of Italy, passing some forty per cent. of the total trade of the
country. The fact that half her imports, in weight, consist of coal,
tells of the main economic disadvantage of modern Italy as compared with
the chief northern countries; but the modern development of industry is
all the more notable. Under a system of general free trade, it might go
much further.

The fact remains that modern Italy is no such intellectual beacon-light
among the nations as she was in the "old, unhappy, far-off times"; and
upon this the historical sentimentalist is prone to moralise. But there
is no perceptible reason why the new life, well managed, should not
yield new intellectual glories; and the latterday intellectual
Renaissance of Italy may one day take its place in the historic
retrospect as no less notable than that of the days of strife.
