CHAPTER II

ROMAN POLITICAL EVOLUTION


¤ 1
A survey of the ancient history best known to us may help to make
clearer the fatality of strife and the impossibility of solving it save
by transcending the physical plane. The habit of summing up all Roman
history as so many planned actions of "the Romans," or of "Rome," is in
singular contrast with the imbroglio of the records. In the social stage
discovered to us by the analysis of the oldest known institutions,
"early" Rome is already an artificial political organism, far removed
from the simple life of tribal barbarism.[12] There are three tribes;
the very name of tribe, it may be, comes from the number three[13] in
the flection _tribus_; and the subdivisions are fixed by the numbers
three and ten.[14] Behind the artificial "tribe" is a past in which, it
may be, a group of villages forms the _pagus_ or settlement.[15]

Already privilege and caste are fully established, even between classes
of freemen; and only by inference can we reach the probable first bases
of civic union among the ruling caste. They were clearly a caste of
conquerors. Their _curi¾_, apparently the oldest form of group after the
family or the clan,[16] are artificially arranged, numbering thirty,
each _curia_ containing nominally a hundred _gentes_, each _gens_
nominally ten families.

     Eduard Meyer (_Geschichte des Alterthums_, ii, 511) decides for the
     view of L. Lange, that the historic appellation of Roman citizens,
     _Quirites_, derives from _curia_. The ancients had several theories
     as to the name. One (Festus) was that the Sabine goddess Curis gave
     her name to the Sabine town Cures (cp. Athen, Athenai), whence,
     according to the legend, had come a band under Titus Tatius, who
     conquered the Capitoline and Quirinal hills, and had for tribe-god
     Quirinus. Cp. Ihne, _Early Rome_, p. 82. Mommsen (Eng. tr. 1862, i,
     57, 78, _notes_) has secured currency for the other tradition,
     argued for by F.W. Newman (_Regal Rome_, 1852, pp. 55-56), that the
     root is the Sabine word _curis, quiris_, a spear. For this somewhat
     unplausible theory there is support in the fact that in the cognate
     Gaelic _coir_, pronounced qu”r, means a spear, and that there is
     derived thence _curiadh_, a warrior. Mommsen is followed by
     Merivale, _General History of Rome_, 5th ed. p. 13; and Greenidge,
     _Roman Public Life_, p. 33. Pott and Becker, who derived _Quirites_
     from _curia_, explain the latter word as _co-viria_, the band of
     warriors. And as the view that "Athen" comes from "Athenai," not
     _vice vers‰_, has the stronger claims to acceptance, the more
     acceptable presumption is that "Curis" and Quirinus evolved from
     the _curia_. If _Quirites_ meant spearmen, how could C¾sar be
     understood to cow mutineers by simply addressing them as Quirites
     [= citizens]? The curia theory is supported by the facts that "the
     Roman constitutional tradition ... makes the division into curies
     alone originate with the origin of the city"; that it "appears as
     an essential part of the Latin municipal system;" and that of all
     the old divisions it seems to be the only one that "really
     fulfilled important functions in the primitive constitutional
     organisation" (Mommsen, B. i, ch. v, pp. 73-75).

These _curi¾_ may be conceived as derived from inner tribal or clan
groups formed in the conquering stage, since they are ostensibly united
by their collective or curial _sacra_, the rites for which the grouped
_gentes_--who each have their private _sacra_--assemble in a special
place, under a special priest. They still retain the usage of a common
banquet,[17] the earliest form of collective religion known to us.[18]
Apart from the members of the _curi¾_ are the conquered _plebs_,[19]
"the many" not enslaved, but payers of tribute; without share in the
_curi¾_ or vote in the _comitia_, or assembly, and without part in the
curial or other _sacra_.

     On this head there has been some gratuitous confusion. Schwegler
     (i, 621 _sq._) gives convincing reasons for the view that in early
     times the plebs were not members of the _curi¾_. Cp. Ihne, as
     cited, pp. 110, 127; and Fustel de Coulanges, p. 278 _sq._ Meyer
     (ii, 513, 521) asserts, on the contrary, without any specification
     of periods, that the _curi¾_ included plebeians as well as
     patricians. The contradiction seems to arise out of inattention to
     chronology, or a misreading of Mommsen. That historian rightly sets
     forth in his history (B. ii, ch. i; Eng. trans. ed. 1862, i,
     264-65) that the plebs were not admitted into the _comitia curiata_
     before the "Servian" period; adding that these bodies were "at the
     same time" almost totally deprived of their prerogatives. In his
     _Ršmisches Forschungen_, 1864, i, 144 _sq._, he shows that they
     were admitted in the "_historic_ period"--when the _comitia_ in
     question had ceased to have any legal power, and when, as he
     elsewhere states, the admission "practically gave little more than
     the capacity for adrogation" (_Ršmisches Staatsrecht_, Bd. iii,
     Abth. i, p. 93). Here again he states that "to equal rights in the
     curies, especially to the right of vote in the comitia, the
     plebeians attained only in the later times" (_Id._ p. 72). Yet
     Professor Pelham, in asserting (p. 21; cp. p. 46) that "the
     _primitive_ Roman people of the thirty _curi¾_ included all the
     freemen of the community, _simple as well as gentle_," gives the
     note: "The view here taken on the vexed question of the purely
     patrician character of the _curi¾_ is that of Mommsen (_Ršm.
     Forschungen_, vol. i)."

     When this error is corrected, the question ceases to be vexed.
     Schwegler has disposed of the blunder of Dionysius, who ascribes to
     the plebeians a share in the _curi¾_ from the beginning; and it is
     not disputed that they were allowed to enter when the _comitia
     curiata_ had been practically superseded by the _comitia
     centuriata_. It is to be noted that the denial of the inclusion of
     the plebeians in the original _curi¾_ does not apply to the
     _clientes_, whose status, though non-patrician, had been different
     from that of the true plebs. M. Delaunay, who argues that the
     plebeians were all along admitted to the _curi¾_, adds the
     qualification: "Doubtless not the entire mass of the plebeians, but
     only those who were ... attached to the gentes" (Robiou et
     Delaunay, _Les Institutions de l'ancienne Rome_, 1884, i, 21). But
     who were these _gentilitia_ if not the _clientes_? (cp. _loc. cit._
     p. 26).

     The _populus_ at this stage, then, is not "the people" in the
     modern sense; it is the aggregate of the privileged _curi¾_, and
     does not include the plebs,[20] which at this stage is not even
     part of the army. But a separate quasi-plebeian class, the
     _clientes_ of the patricians, are in a state of special dependence
     upon the latter, and in a subordinate fashion share their
     privileges.

     The _clientes_ have very much the air of being primarily the
     servile or inferior part of the early clan or _gens_, as distinct
     from its "gentlemen." Cp. Burton, _Hist. of Scotland_, viii,
     524-25, as to the lower and the higher (duniewassal) orders in the
     Scottish Highland clans. "In the old life of the _pagus_ and the
     _gens_ the weaker sought the protection of the stronger by a
     willing vassalage" (Greenidge, _Roman Public Life_, p. 6). The
     _clientes_ are the nominal as distinct from the real "family" of
     the chief or _patronus_. M. Delaunay (_Les Institutions de
     l'ancienne Rome_, as cited, i, 27) thinks with Mommsen (so also
     Dupond, pp. 20-21) that they were mainly freedmen, but gives no
     evidence. As to the meaning and etymology of the word (_clientes_
     from _cluere_ or _cliere_, "to listen" or "obey"), cp. Newman,
     _Regal Rome_, p. 49; Ortolan, p. 29; Mommsen, _Ršmisches
     Staatsrecht_, III, i, 1887, p. 63. The theory that the plebeians
     were all _clientes_ (Ortolan, pp. 25, 27) seems untenable, though
     Mommsen (_Staatsrecht_, III, i, 63) pronounces that "all
     non-patricians were clients"; and Meyer (ii, 521) appears to
     acquiesce. Only in theory can the mass of the plebs have been
     clients at any time. Cp. Fustel de Coulanges, pp. 277-78. The
     _clientes_, it seems clear, were as such admitted to the _comitia_,
     whereas the plebs were not. See the citations of Fustel de
     Coulanges from Livy, ii, 56-64; also iii, 14 (Dupond, p. 22, doubts
     the fact). On any view, the _clientela_ rapidly dwindled, passing
     into the plebs (cp. Dupond, p. 23; Livy, vi, 18). As to its early
     status see Fustel de Coulanges, p. 273 _sq._ Ortolan, after
     representing all plebeians as clients, speaks (p. 31) of plebeians
     belonging to no gens (so Aulus Gellius, x, 20).

     Wealth is not yet a matter of land-owning--the main element of
     property is cattle;[21] and the bulk of the land is _ager
     occupatorius_, a great "common" on which all men's cattle feed.
     The voteless free plebeian has simply his home and homestead, "toft
     and croft," the latter being two yokes (= five roods) of land, on
     which he raises the grain and olives and vegetables that feed his
     household.[22] This goes to his heir. Here arises another problem.
     E.W. Robertson (as last cited) decides that the "two yokes" can
     have been only "the homestead, and could not have included the farm
     or property attached to it." The _heredium_, he holds, following
     Pliny (_Hist. Nat._, xix, 19), and citing Livy (vi, 36), was only
     in the _hortus_, the house and garden, "and not in the arable or
     pasture land." But surely the arable was on a different footing
     from the pasture land (_ager compascus_). Corn was not grown in
     common, unless it were by the _gentes_ (Mommsen, vol. i, pp. 38,
     72, 193). The solution seems to be that given by Greenidge, that as
     "the _heredium_ consisted only of two _jugera_ (Festus, p. 53), an
     amount obviously insufficient for the maintenance of a family,"
     "there must have been _ager privatus_ as well, owned by some larger
     unit, and this unit would naturally have been the gens" (_Roman
     Public Life_, p. 15).

     Among general historians of Rome Mommsen seems to be the first to
     note this circumstance, and he gives neither details nor evidence.
     Schwegler, discussing (i, 619) the theory of Puchta that there was
     no private property in Rome before the "arrival" of the plebs,
     admits that among the ancient Germans the land was yearly
     apportioned among the groups as such, but finds that "Roman
     tradition tells of nothing of the kind." (So Greenidge, p. 15.) In
     any case, Mommsen, while insisting that "the fields (_sic_) of the
     gentes (_Geschlechts-Genossen_) in the earliest period lay
     together" (_Staatsrecht_, III, i, 24; cp. p. 94), admits that such
     gentile ownership had at an early stage disappeared (_frŸh
     verschwundenen_). There was then no communal tillage in the
     historic period. Cincinnatus, in the legend, returns to the plough
     on his own croft. Further, the early complaints cited by Livy as to
     the "two yokes" being "hardly enough to raise a roof on or to make
     a grave in" were addressed by the tribunes on behalf of plebeians
     to patricians who each had above five hundred yokes. The non-client
     plebeians then had no share in the land of the _gentes_ or clans,
     being themselves in large part dispossessed by conquest.

     Meyer (ii, 519) pronounces that the plot of two yokes was, "of
     course, no farm, but a kitchen-garden," adding: "It is also the
     personal land of the small farmers and day-labourers who look after
     the lands of the large landholders, not the original private
     holding in contrast to the mark belonging in common to the _gens_
     (_Geschlecht_) or commune (_Gauverband_)." But on the previous page
     Meyer says that "the land was settled not by the _gentes_, but
     communally (_genossenschaftlich_) by unions of equal freemen." If
     these, then, were the _curi¾_ (the Mark, says Meyer in this
     connection, did _not_ belong to the _gentes_), they did not include
     the plebs; and we come back to the datum that the free plebeian had
     no means of support save his five roods and what beasts he had on
     the public pasture. The pasture-land, again, is surmised by Mommsen
     (ch. xiii, p. 201) to have been small in area relatively to the
     arable-land communally owned and cultivated by the _gentes_ or
     clans--a proposition irreconcilable with the evidence as to the
     quantity of cattle. As to the two yokes of land, Schwegler decides
     (i, 618) that it was "nowise inadequate" as arable-land, in view of
     the extraordinary fruitfulness of Italy, and, further, of the
     circumstance that "the free burghers had also the use of the common
     land" (for pasture). We are to remember that Italian land could
     yield two crops in a year. (Niebuhr, _Lebensnachrichten_, ii, 245,
     cited by Schwegler.)

     On the general problem as to why or how the land once communally
     tilled ceased to be so, we have still no better light than the old
     generalisation of Hobbes in reply to his own question: "Upon what
     impulsives, when all was equally every man's in common, men did
     rather think it fitting that every man should have his inclosure?"
     "I found," he puts it, "that from a community of goods there must
     needs arise contention whose enjoyment should be greatest, and from
     that contention all kind of calamities must unavoidably ensue."
     [Epistle Dedicatory to _Philosophical Rudiments concerning
     Government and Civil Society_ (translation of _De Cive_), 1651. Cp.
     Goldwin Smith, _The United States_, 1893, p. 23.]

The patrician, of course, had a larger homestead, at least "four yokes"
in the earlier stages; later seven; later still twenty-five.[23] But the
patricians were "a class of occupying landholders rather than
proprietary landowners."[24] The "public land" was literally so, save in
so far as the patricians would have the ampler (and often untaxed or
low-rented) use of it for their much larger herds;[25] or, it may be,
for cultivation by their clients or slaves. _Heredia_, however, were
saleable, and herein lay one usual path to the dispossession and
enslavement of freemen; while at all stages there went on that pressure
of population on means of subsistence which underlies all economic
history.

Thus far, however, mere conquest has done less to impoverish and enslave
the mass than the economic process is to do later. The conquerors,
probably highland herdsmen to begin with, take estates for themselves,
but leave the mass of the conquered in possession or use of land for
which they pay tribute, and upon which they can independently live.[26]
And thus far they live mainly as small pastoral farmers.[27]

Trade and artisanship were for long but slightly developed, and were
mainly in the hands of slaves, dependent "clients," or foreigners; and
artisans and aliens were not admitted into the legions.[28] The ruling
caste occupied, potentially[29] if not constantly, the city proper, the
two or three fortified hills[30] on which at this stage it stands. They
were certainly not the founders. The Palatine and the Quirinal hills had
been occupied by Latins and Sabines respectively long before the time
traditionally assigned to the "founding" of Rome; and there were
communities there before them. Modern excavators trace many successive
strata of civilisation before that which we call the Roman; and the
probability is that the Romans of history, like the kindred Sabines,
conquered a previous city "aristocracy" of kindred race, whose place and
possessions they took. The previous inhabitants had presumably grown
weak for self-defence by reason of some such disintegrating economic
evolution as was soon to affect the conquerors themselves. Such a
disintegration may well have taken place in the case of Alba Longa, of
which the prior supremacy seems entirely credible.[31] But before Alba
Longa there had been a civilisation[32] on the Roman hills which perhaps
outwent in economic evolution anything attained in the Roman period
until the last century of the Republic.

     This was already inferred in the eighteenth century by Ferguson
     (_History of the Roman Republic_, 1783, ch. i, _note_; perhaps
     following Maffei [1727], cited by Schwegler, i, 807), from the
     nature of the remains of the great _cloac¾_, which he held could
     not have been built by any of the early Roman kings. That view is
     since adopted by various authorities; see Middleton's _Remains of
     Ancient Rome_, 1892, i, 104-107; and Robiou et Delaunay, _Les
     Institutions de l'ancienne Rome_, 1884, vol. ii, ch. i, ¤ 1. Cp.
     Merivale, _General History of Rome_, pp. 9-11; Burton, _Etruscan
     Bologna_, 1876, pp. 170-74. Livy (i, 38) ascribes great _cloac¾_ to
     the legendary Tarquin the elder. Professor Ettore Pais, on the
     other hand, confidently decides that the _cloaca maxima_ belongs to
     the republican period, and dates it about 170 B.C. In any case, we
     know that an ante-Roman civilisation underlies the historic, and
     may now decide with Mr. Mahaffy that "as civilisation of some kind
     was vastly older on the Hill of Troy than any of us had imagined,
     so the site of every historic city is likely to have been the
     habitation of countless generations" (_Survey of Greek Civ._ 1897,
     p. 28).


¤ 2

There had in fact been a "decline and fall of Rome" before the Rome we
know began to be. Relatively to their predecessors, the early Romans
were even as the northerners who in a later age were to capture historic
Rome--vigorous barbarians beginning a new era on a footing of fraternity
in conquest; and the condition of their early success as State-builders
seems to have been precisely the joining of several tribe-groups in a
real federation,[33] securing local peace as between the hill-holders.
It has been said that Rome grew up without any known aid from men of
political genius such as Solon.[34] But men of genius have counted for
something in all stages of upward human evolution. The guiders of early
Rome are lost in a cloud of myth and fable; but some man or men of civic
faculty there must have been to shape tendency, though doubtless a main
factor in the early union was the simple _collocation_ of the hills
first fortified. Granting that Servius Tullius is a mythical king, the
elaborate constitution assigned to him stood for _some_ planning by able
men, and has several main points in common with that given to Athens by
Solon.

Whatever were the part played by individual leaders, Roman or Etruscan,
there clearly came into play in early Rome as in Athens the important
factor of mixture of stocks. Romans and Sabines united to begin with;
and the conquered plebs, destined later to enter the constitution and
share in all the civic offices, represented some such source of
recuperation to the Roman aristocracy as did the Saxons to that of
England after the Norman Conquest. If we add the probable factor of an
Etruscan element, Rome is to be conceived as standing for a ruling class
of more various faculty than was to be found in any of the rival
communities singly. The progressive absorption of the most enterprising
of the plebeians was again, probably, an exception to the rule of Italic
life as to that of other races, so that in following the class struggles
of Rome we are to note not so much the violence of the process as the
fact that, so far as it went, it was relatively fortunate. And its
success, again, is conceivably due to the fact, among others, that from
an early period the region of the seven defensible hills was a refuge or
centre for men breaking away from the other Italian communities, where
conservatism held firm.

Behind the legend of the flocking of all manner of "broken men" to the
standard of Romulus lies the probability that the ancient "asylum"
behind the Capitol brought a variety of types to the place; and as in
Athens so in Rome, such variety of stock might well raise the level of
faculty. But it was a faculty for aggression. Given the initial
federation of Romans and Sabines, the one general force of comity or
cohesion, apart from the more public cults, is the bond of mere
collective antagonism to other communities. The total polity is one of
war; and never in the history of civilisation has that ground of comity
long averted the economic process by which social inequality deepens and
widens. It is thus entirely credible that, through this economic
process, which we shall trace later, the early Roman polity came to a
pass at which its conquest by Etruscan "kings" was welcomed by the
plebs, sinking into poverty or held in outlawry under primitive
"capitalistic" exploitation. There is no clear historic record of the
process; but all the better evidence goes to prove its occurrence.[35]

The most plausible theory of the constitution ascribed to Servius
Tullius is that it was imposed by Etruscan conquerors. The earlier
Romans had been quasi-sacerdotally ruled by priest-kings of the
primitive type, "kings of the sacrifice," whose religious powers were
balanced by the secular interest of the patrician heads of
families--themselves priests of their family cults. The "Servian"
constitution put down the _rex sacrificulus_, divided the city into four
tribes, and its territory into twenty-six districts, each under a
headman or headmen. The city at the same time was in part new walled,
and the seven hills united; while the mass of the free population were
divided into five classes according to their property, and enrolled for
military purposes in 193 "centuries." In the first and richest class
were forty centuries of men above forty-six for the defence of the city,
and forty of younger men for service in the field; while the second,
third, and fourth classes were divided into twenty centuries each, and
the fifth class into thirty. The poorest of all were grouped in a
separate century, the "Proletarians," or "breeders," without military
duties; and the trumpeters, armourers, and carpenters in four more. New
assemblies, the _comitia centuriata_, were formed, in which all members
of the centuries shared, the old _comitia curiata_ being thus virtually
superseded. The military organisation was made the basis of a fiscal
one, in which the classes were taxed on the capital value of their
property. As freedom from direct taxation was the mark of the ancient
"free" communities in general, the whole arrangement seems to be one
that only a conqueror could have imposed; and the tradition ran that
Servius was regarded as the friend of the poor, who made his birthday an
annual festival.

But plebeian distress was probably not the sole, perhaps not the
primary, factor in the convulsion. All along, the process of inequality
had gone on among plebeians and patricians alike, some of the former
rising to wealth and some of the latter sinking to relative poverty.
Thus arises in effect the struggle of a "middle class" to share the
political and social privileges of the "upper"; and there is reason to
think that the Etruscan conquest was furthered by rich plebeians as
against the patricians. The new constitution was what the Greeks called
a "timocracy," or "rule of property"; and though in respect of the
_comitia centuriata_ plebeians were admitted to the franchise, it was
under such provisions as to voting that the richer classes easily held
the balance of power.[36] At the same time the patricians retained the
religious power of the old kings, as custodians of the ritual
mysteries--a great source of dominion. Thus the crisis was only
temporarily relieved, and the struggle was renewed again and again, both
under and after the kings. We can broadly divine that the anti-patrician
rule of the king, who would rely on the plebs, unified against him the
patricians or "free" citizens, who sought to keep down the masses;
while, on the other hand, the increasing outlaw plebs was unified by its
sheer need.[37]

As to the rule of the kings, whether native or Etruscan, no exact
knowledge is now possible. We can but trace some of their functions in
certain constitutional forms. Thus the Senate, or Council of the Elders,
appears to have been the council of the king, selected by him, but
capable of nominating his successor.[38] Whatever were its original
function, it became in time the supreme power in the State, growing
alike in numbers and in power, overruling or eclipsing the _comitia
curiata_, _comitia centuriata_, and other bodies in which the general
mass, first of patrician citizens and later of enfranchised plebeians,
were enrolled.[39] But it is not through the complicated arch¾ology of
the Roman constitution, latterly compiled with such an infinity of
scholarly labour, that the nature of Roman evolution is really to be
known. The technique of the system resulted from an endless process of
compromise among social forces; and it is in the actual clash and play
of those forces, as revealed in the simple records, that the human
significance of it all is to be felt. In this way we substitute for a
vague and false conception of unitary growth one of perpetual strife of
classes, interests, and individualities.

In the doubtful transition period, as the tradition goes, it is in the
time of discontented plebeian subjection, after the expulsion of the
king (510 B.C.), that the Etruscan enemy captures the city (497); and
the surmise that the battle of Lake Regillus was not really a Roman
victory[40] is partly strengthened by the fact that soon after it there
occur the division into twenty-five tribes, the tumults of the nexi, and
the successful Secession of the Plebs, ending in their incorporation,
with two tribunes to represent their interests (494). There is a clear
presumption that only from a weakened patriciate, forced to seek union,
could the plebs have won their tribunate and enfranchisement. On the
other hand, it is after victories over the Volscians that the consul
Spurius Cassius, who had proposed to divide among landless men the land
conquered from the Hernicans, is said to have been executed (485) by the
triumphant aristocracy; and it is in another period of security, when
the Veientines and Sabines are depressed (473), that the tribune Cneius
Genucius is murdered for having ventured to bring a consular to trial.
Always we are in presence of a brutal caste, in the main utterly
selfish, some of whose members are at all times as prone to the use of
the dagger as an Italian _camorra_ of our own day. Yet it is by the
forcing of concessions on this caste that the Roman polity is kept
vigorous and adaptable in comparison with those of the surrounding
States which Rome subordinated or overran.

While Rome thrives, a new project for popular law reform is defeated
(462); and it is after Cincinnatus, according to the legend, barely
saves the State (458) that the tribunes are raised from five to ten, and
the land is divided among the poor (456); though at the same time
decemvirs are appointed and the conservative Twelve (at first Ten)
Tables are drawn up (451-450). Thus partially strengthened, the plebs
are able soon to force the abdication of the decemvirate (449) by the
old menace of their withdrawal; and for a time the commonalty
sufficiently holds its own, getting (445) the right of marriage with
patricians, and (444) the institution of military tribunes with consular
power;[41] though fresh distribution of land is prevented, and the
patricians learn to divide the tribunes against each other. Thus class
dissension goes on till the Gauls capture the city (390), multitudes of
the Romans flying to Veii. Then it is that the plebeian party, after the
Gauls have gone, are willing to transfer the seat of government to Veii;
and the threat would doubtless win them some concessions in the
rebuilding of Rome. But population always blindly increases; and the
cancer of poverty spreads, despite the chronic planting of colonies in
subject territory. Manlius is executed for trying to relieve debtors;
but some land is reluctantly distributed. New wars create new popular
distress, and new colonies fail to relieve it. At length the Licinian
laws, relieving debtors and limiting estates, are proposed (376), and
after nine years of agitation are passed at the crisis (367) at which
the Gauls (who themselves had in the meantime undergone dissensions)
again attack Rome; while the powers of the consuls (limited in 443 by
the appointment of two Censors) are now further limited by the creation
of a Pr¾tor (patrician) and of Curule _¾diles_, alternately taken from
the two strata.

This makes a temporary palliation, and in time the now privileged
plebeians[42] lean to the patrician side and status; while fresh wars
with Hernicans, Gauls, Etruscans, and Samnites check class strife, and
the patricians recover preponderance, passing a law (358) to check "new
men." This is immediately followed by counter measures, limiting
interest to ten per cent. and putting a five per cent. tax on
manumissions; but the eternal distress of debtors is renewed, and a vain
attempt is made to meet it (352) by State loans, and again by reducing
interest to five per cent. (347). Increase of plebeian poverty again
causes reactions, and after a mutiny futile laws are passed prohibiting
interest altogether (342); the dictator Publilius carries popular
political laws (339) checking the power of the Senate, and debtors are
once more protected (326). After many wars, checking all domestic
progress, popular distress causes a last Secession of the Plebs (287)
and new political concessions to them; but still wars multiply, till all
Italy is Romanised (266). The now mixed warlike aristocracy of birth,
wealth, and office monopolises power in the Senate; and the residual
plebs gradually ceases to be a distinct moral force, its last great
struggle being made under the Gracchi, to whom it gives no valid
support.

If we consider this evolution purely as a play of domestic political
forces, we recognise it from first to last as a simple conflict of class
needs and interests, partially modified at times by movements of true
public spirit on the part of such men as the patricians who supported
the Licinian laws, and such men as the Gracchi. The State-organism is
the result of the struggles and pressures of its elements. What happened
in the chronic readjustments was never a democratisation of the State,
but at most an institutional protection of the poorer plebeians, and an
admission of the richer to something like equal status with the
optimates. Never was the "people" really united by any common home
interest beyond the need of extorting some privileges. Only to that
extent were the richer plebeians at one with the poorer; and there can
be little doubt that as soon as the former secured the privileges they
craved they tended to abuse them as the patricians had done. There was
no _personnel_ adequate to the effective working of the Licinian laws in
face of a perpetual process of conquest which infallibly evoked always
the instinct of acquisition, and never the science which might have
controlled it. The early division of the State-territory into
twenty-five tribes (495), of whom twenty-one were rural, determined the
limitation of the political problem to the simple sharing of land; and
every effort of public-spirited men to arrest the aggregation of lands
in the hands of a few meant a convulsive explosion of resistance by the
wealthy.

From the Polonian prattle of Cicero to his son we can gather how all
schemes of reconstruction were viewed by the ruling class, whether in
retrospect or prospect. The slaying of Tiberius Gracchus by Scipio
Nasica is a standing theme of praise;[43] the lesson of the course of
things social towards a steep sunderance of "haves" and "have-nots" is
angrily evaded. Cicero knew as well as any the need for social
reconstruction in Rome;[44] and he repeatedly records the sagacity of
Lucius Marcus Philippus, who had been tribune and consul in Cicero's
boyhood. As consul, Philippus had resisted the attempts of M. Livius
Drusus to reform the Senate and provide for the poorer citizens and the
Italians; but inasmuch as he had during his tribuneship avowed the fact
that there were not left two thousand men in the State who owned
property, Cicero denounces the avowal as pernicious.[45] The ideal
aristocratic course was to resist all political change and slay those
who attempted it--Drusus as the Gracchi before him. It was as a
consummation of that policy that there exploded the so-called Marsian or
Social War, in which Rome and the Italian States around her grappled and
tore for years together like their ancestors of the tribal period;
whereafter Marians and Sullans in turn rent Rome, till Sulla's iron
dictatorship, restoring class supremacy, marked the beginning of the end
of self-governing institutions, and prepared for the day of autocracy,
which was not to come without another agony of long-protracted civil
war. It is the supreme proof of the deadliness of the path of conquest
that for most Romans the end of Roman "freedom" was a relief.


¤ 3

The effect of continuous foreign war in frustrating democracy is here
plain. On the one hand, the peasant-farmers are reduced to debt and
slavery by their inability to farm their lands in war-time, while the
patrician's lands are worked by his slaves. On the other hand, their
distress is met by a share in the lands conquered; and after the
soldiers are allowed pay (406 B.C.) they are more and more ready to join
in conquest. Not only is popular discontent put off by the prospect of
foreign plunder, but the perpetual state of aggressive war, while
tending first to pauperise most of the small cultivators who make the
army, breeds a new public spirit on a low plane, a sinister fraternity
of conquest. Ethics must needs worsen throughout the State when the
primitive instinct of strife developed into a policy of plunder; and
worsened ethics means a positive weakening of a society's total
strength. There is no lesson that men are slower to learn--and this
naturally, because they see the success of unjust conquest--yet there
is no truth easier to prove from history. Early Rome was strong as
against strong enemies, because not only were its people hardily bred,
but the majority were on the whole satisfied that they had just laws:
the reciprocal sense of recognised _rights_ sustained public spirit at
the possible maximum. But the rights are thoroughly selfish at best; and
it is the diversion of their selfishness to the task of continuous
conquest that "saves" the community from early dissolution, preserving
it for the life of dominion, which in turn destroys the old forces of
cohesion, and leaves a community fit only for subjection to a military
autocracy. The society of mutual selfish rights has a measure of
cohesion of its own, up to the point of conflict between the "haves" and
the "have-nots." An outwardly similar cohesion can, indeed, be sustained
for a time by mere concurrence in piracy; but it lies in the very nature
of society that union so engineered, cohesion so secured, is fleeting.
Men whose main discipline is the practice of tyranny over aliens become
simply incapable of strict reciprocity towards kin, and there must ensue
either internecine strife or the degradation of the weaker elements, or
a sequence of these results.

This is what happened in Rome. One of the first political signs of the
contagion of the life of rapine in the later Republic is the growth of
public bribery as a means to further wealth. Administrative posts being
the chief of these means, candidates for them set about buying votes in
the modern manner.[46] As early as 432 B.C. the law against canvassing
by candidates[47] (_lex de ambitu_) suggests the recognition of
electoral corruption; and later there followed a whole series of futile
vetoes--futile because the social conditions grew always morally worse.
The _lex ®milia B¾bia_ (182 B.C.) forbade all money gifts by candidates;
and twenty-three years later another law decreed that offenders should
be exiled. This also failing, there followed the _leges tabellari¾_,
establishing the ballot (139-137). Still the disease persisted, because
there was no stop now possible to the career of conquest, which had
undermined the very instincts whereon law depends; and on the
treacherous struggle for place and pelf by way of bribery there
supervened the direct grapple over the ill-gotten gains. The Roman
ruling class had evolved into a horde of filibustering fortune-hunters,
as did the Greeks under and after Alexander; and the political sequels
of despotism and civil war were substantially the same.

The process was gradual, and the phenomena are at times apt to delude
us. When a political machinery was set up that conduced to systematic
and extending warfare in which the commonwealth was often at stake, the
community had a new albeit fatal bond of cohesion, and the destructive
or repulsive energies for generations found a wide field outside of the
State. It is when the aristocratic Republic, succeeding finally in the
long struggle with Carthage for the wealth of Sicily and Spain and the
control of the Mediterranean, has further overrun Greece and pretty well
exhausted the immediate fields of conquest, that the forces of repulsion
again begin to work destructively within the body politic itself, and
men and classes become the fools of their animosities. The wars of
faction, the popular propaganda of the Gracchi, the murderous strifes of
Marius and Sulla, the rivalries of Pompey and Crassus, Conservatives and
Democrats, C¾sar and Pompey, the pandemonium on C¾sar's death, all in
turn represent the renewed operation within the State of the crude
energies of cohesion and strife which had been so long employed in
foreign war. And the strife is progressively worse, because the
materials are more complex and more corrupt. The aristocracy are more
arrogant and hardened, the free farmer class has in large part
disappeared, and the populace are more debauched.[48]

The perpetual wars had multiplied slaves; and the slaves added a new and
desperate element to the social problem. It was the proof of the fatal
lack in Rome of vital ethical feeling--or, let us say, of social
science--that this deadly iniquity was never effectually recoiled from,
or even impugned as it had been, before Aristotle, among the more highly
evolved of the Greeks.[49] As wealth and luxury, pride and power
accumulated, the usage of slave labour spread ever further and ate ever
deeper into the population, brutalising alike the enslaved and the free.

     It was doubtless a partial recognition of this that motived, in
     Cicero's day, the large number of affranchisements of slaves
     (Wallon, _Hist. de l'Esclavage_, ii, 409). But fresh enslavements
     went on; the amelioration consisted in the brevity of the period of
     enslavement in cases of good conduct. And the evil was in the main
     a product of conquest. It is fairly established by Dureau de la
     Malle (_ƒcon. polit. des Romains_, 1840, vol. i, liv. ii, ch. 2)
     that down to the second Punic War Roman slaves were few. They would
     be for the most part _nexi_, victims of debt. As conquests
     multiplied prisoners, the class increased rapidly. Broadly
     speaking, the house servants were all slaves, as were the bulk of
     the shepherds in the great _latifundia_, the crews of the galleys,
     and many of the artisans. The total number has doubtless been
     greatly exaggerated, both in ancient and modern times, as has been
     the population of the imperial city. Athen¾us is responsible for
     many wild estimates. (Cp. Letronne, as cited by Dureau, liv. ii,
     ch. 4.) Dureau arrives by careful calculation at an estimate of an
     Italian population of some five millions about the year 529 A.U.C.,
     of whom some two and three quarter millions were free and some two
     and a quarter millions were slaves or _met¾ci_, aliens without
     political rights (i, 296). The population of Rome as late as
     Aurelian he puts at between 500,000 and 600,000 (i, 368). (See
     Prof. Bury's note in his ed. of Gibbon, iii, 308, for different
     views. Gibbon, Bunsen, and Hodgkin put the figure at about a
     million.) The exact proportion of slaves to free is not of the
     essence of the problem. A society with nine slaves for every eleven
     free was sufficiently committed to degeneration.

But the fatality of war was as irresistible as the fatality of plebeian
degradation; and the collapse of the slave war in Sicily (132), and the
political movement of the Gracchi, alongside of the new warlike triumphs
in Spain and Southern Gaul (121--the first great successes since the
fall of Carthage), illustrate the general principle that a ruling class
or house may always reckon on checking domestic criticism and popular
self-assertion by turning the animal energies of the people to animal
strife with another nation, in which case union correlates with strife.
Wars imply comradeship and the putting aside of domestic strife for the
time being; and a war with Illyria was made the pretext for suspending
the operation of the new land law passed by the elder Gracchus when the
younger later sought to carry it out. The triumphs of Marius, again,
over Jugurtha and the Cimbri availed nothing to unify the parties in the
State, or to secure his own. In democratising the army by drawing on a
demoralised _demos_, he did but make it a more facile tool for the
general, a thing more detached from the body politic.[50] The tendency
of all classes in Rome to unite against the claims of the outside
Italians was from the first a stumbling-block to the democrats within
Rome; and the final identification of the popular interest, in the
period of Marius and Sulla, with an anti-Roman policy among the Marians,
gave to Sulla, strong in the prestige of recent conquest, the position
of advantage, apart from his own strength. Further, as Montesquieu very
justly notes, civil wars turn an entire nation into soldiers, and give
it a formidable advantage over its enemies when it regains unity.[51]
But this again is only for a time; there is no enduring society where
there is no general sense of reciprocal justice among free men; and
systematic militarism and plunder are the negation of moral reciprocity.

One partial exception, it is true, must be made. In the early days of
the Republic the poor soldier stood to lose his farm by his patriotism.
Soon the fighters had to be paid; and from the day of Marius onwards
Roman commanders perforce provided for their veterans--so often their
accomplices in the violation of their country's laws and liberties. The
provision was made on the one hand by donations from the loot, on the
other by grants of land taken from others, it might be in Italy itself.
Sulla so rewarded his sworders; the triumvirs took the land of eighteen
Italian towns to divide among their legionaries.[52] To the end the
emperors had constantly to provide for their time-expired men by
confiscations. Thus did empire pay for its instrument.


¤ 4

The animal energies themselves, in time, are affected by domestic
conditions; and when C¾sar comes on the scene Rome is visibly far on the
way to a state of things such as had long before appeared in older
civilisations[53]--a state of things commonly but rather loosely called
degenerate, in which the animal energies are grown less robust, and the
life therefore in some respects more civilised. Such a course had been
run in Italy long before the rise of Rome, notably in Etruria, where,
after a conquest of aborigines by a small body of invaders,[54] who were
in touch with early Greek culture, the civilisation remains at that
archaic stage while Greek civilisation continues to progress.[55] There,
with a small aristocracy lording it over a people of serfs,[56] progress
of all kinds was arrested, and even the religion of the conquerors
assimilated to that of the aborigines.[57] In the Rome of C¾sar we see,
after much fluctuation, with a more complex and less enfeebled structure
of population, the beginnings of the same fixation of classes; while, at
the same time, there has been such psychological variation as can begin
to give new and ostensibly higher channels to the immanent forces of
union and strife. This is the social condition that, given the required
military evolution, above all lends itself to imperialism or absolute
monarchy; which system in turn best maintains itself by a policy of
conquest, so employing the animal energies and keeping up the cohesive
force of militarist pride throughout all classes. Even now, of course,
in a semi-enslaved populace, as in a slave population pure and
simple,[58] there were possibilities of insurrection; and it was at
length empirically politic for the emperors to give the populace its
daily bread and its daily games, as well as to keep it charmed with the
spectacle of conquest. The expedient of doles of food did not at once
condemn itself by dangerously multiplying mouths, because, although it
was only in the upper classes that men commonly refused to marry and
have legitimate children, population was now restrained by the
preventive checks of vice, city life, and wholesale abortion,[59] which
are so much more effective--alike against child and mother[60]--than the
random resort to infanticide, though that too had greatly increased.[61]

On the other hand, as the field of practicable conquest again approaches
exhaustion and no sufficiently strong rival arises to conquer the
conquerors, nothing can hinder that people of all classes, having no
ideals tending to social and intellectual advance, and no sufficient
channel for the instinct of union in the politics of the autocracy,
shall find some channels of a new kind.[62] These are opened in due
course, and take the shape especially of religious combinations or
churches. Such modes had appeared even in the earlier stages of civic
disintegration, when the semi-private or sectarian cults had begun to
compete successfully with the public or civic. They did so by appealing
more freshly and directly to the growths of emotional feeling (the
outcome in part of physiological modification)[63] which no longer found
outlet in primary forms, such as warfare and primitive revelry. After
having themselves consented in times of panic to the introduction of
several cults in the name of the public interest, the ruling classes,
instinctively conservative by the law of their existence, take fright at
the startling popularity of the unofficial Bacchic mysteries, and decide
to stamp out the movement.[64] But the attempt is futile, the causal
conditions remaining; and soon Judaism, Osirianism, Mithraism, the
worships of Attis, Adonis, Bacchus, Isis, Serapis, all more or less
bound up with divination and sorcery, make way in the disintegrating
body politic.[65] The wheel of social evolution had, so to speak, "gone
full circle" since the first Roman _curia_, the basis of the State,
subsisted as groups with their special _sacra_, finding in these their
reason for cohering. Decadent Rome, all other principles of subordinate
cohesion having been worked out, resolves itself once more into groups
similarly motived. But the principle is newly conditioned, and the
_sacra_ now begin the struggle for existence among themselves. The rise
of Christianity is simply the success of a system which, on a good
economic foundation, copied from that of the Jewish synagogues,
assimilates the main attractions of similar worships, while availing
itself of exoteric and democratic as well as esoteric methods. It thus
necessarily gains ground among the multitude, rich as well as poor;[66]
and its ultimate acceptance by the autocrat was due to the very
exclusiveness which at first made it intolerable. Once diffused widely
enough to set up the largest religious organisation in the Empire, it
became the best possible instrument of centralisation and control, and
as such it was accepted and employed.[67]

And now again we see how inevitably the force of attraction correlates
with the force of repulsion. The new channels of the spirit of union,
being dug not by reason but by ignorance, become new channels for the
reverse flow of the spirit of strife; and as sectarian zeal spreads, in
the absence of openings, good or bad, for public spirit, there arise new
forms of domestic hate and struggle. Crude religious fervours,
excluding, or arising in lack of, the play of the saner and higher forms
of thought and feeling, beget crude antipathies;[68] and Christianity
leads back to bloody strifes and seditions such as had not been seen
since the fall of the Republic. There is not intellectuality enough to
raise men above this new superinduced barbarism of ignorant instinct;
half of the old Christendom, disintegrated like the old politics, is
overrun by a more robust barbarism that adopts a simpler creed; and the
new barbaric Christendom exhibits in its turn all the modes of operation
of the biological forces that had been seen in the old.


¤ 5

Thus far we have considered Roman evolution in terms of a moral estimate
of the reactions of classes. But lest we lose sight of the principle of
total causation, it is fitting to restate the process in terms of that
conception, thus explaining it non-morally. We may view Rome, to begin
with, as a case of the unique aggrandisement of a State in virtue of fit
conditions and institutions. Thus (1) the comparatively uncommercial
situation of the early Latins, leaving them, beyond cattle-breeding and
agriculture, no occupation save war for surplus energy, and no readier
way of acquiring wealth;[69] (2) the physical collocation of a group of
seven defensive hills, so close that they must be held by a federated
group;[70] (3) the ethnic collocation of a set of tribe groups of nearly
equal vigour and ardour, strengthening each other's sinews by constant
struggling; (4) the creation (not prescient, but purely as a provision
against kingship) of the peculiar institution of the annual
consulate,[71] securing a perpetuity of motive to conquest and a
continuous flow of administrative energy;[72] (5) the peculiar need,
imposed by this very habit of all-round warfare, for accommodation
between the ruling and ruled classes, and for the safeguarding of the
interests of the latter by laws and franchises; (6) the central position
of Rome in Italy, enabling her to subdue it piecemeal; and finally (7)
the development by all these means of a specialist aristocracy,
habitually trained to administration[73]--all these genetic conditions
combined to build up the most remarkable military empire the world has
ever seen. They obtrude, it is clear, half of the explanation of the
fact that the Romans rose to empire where the much more early civilised
Greek cities of Italy did not.

Of the latter fact we still receive the old explanation that it came of
"the habit, which had ever been the curse of Hellenism, of jealous
separation and frequent war between town and town, as well as internal
feuds in the several cities themselves."[74] But this is clearly no
_vera causa_, as these symptoms are duplicated in the history of Rome
itself. The determining forces must, then, be looked for in the special
conditions. The Greeks, indeed, brought with them the tradition of the
separate City-State; but just as the cities remained independent in
Greece by reason of natural conditions,[75] so the Greek cities of Italy
remained isolated and stationary at a certain strength, because their
basis and way of life were commercial, so that while they restricted
each other's growth or dominance they were in times of peace mutually
nutritive. They wanted customers, not plunder. For the Romans plunder
was the first social need after agriculture, and as they began they
continued. When Jugurtha learned that anything could be had of the
Romans for gold, he had but read an open secret.

Of course, the functions that were originally determined by external
conditions came in time to be initial causes--the teeth and claws, so to
speak, fixing the way of life for the body politic. The upper-class
Romans became, as it were, the experts, the specialists of war and
empire and administration. Until they became wholly demoralised by
habitual plunder, they showed, despite their intense primeval
superstition of citizenship,[76] a degree of sagacity in the
conciliation of their defeated rivals which was a main cause of their
being able to hold out against Hannibal, and which contrasts markedly
with the oppressive and self-defeating policy of imperial Carthage,
Athens, and Sparta. Their tradition in part was still that of conquering
herdsmen, not wholly turned into mere exploiters of humanity. Pitted
against any monarch, they were finally invincible, because a
still-growing class supplied their administrators, as the swarming
provinces supplied their soldiers, and because for all alike war meant
plunder and new lands, as well as glory. Pitted against a republic like
Carthage, even when its armies were led by a man of genius, they were
still insuppressible, inasmuch as Carthage was a community of traders
employing mercenaries, where Rome was a community in arms, producing
generals as Carthage produced merchants. Mithridates failed in turn, as
Hannibal failed. The genius of one commander, exploiting passive
material, could not avail against the accumulated faculty for
organisation in the still self-renewing Roman patriciate.[77]

Carthage had, in fact, preceded Rome on the line of the evolution of
class egoism. Herself an expression of the pressure of the social
problem in the older Semitic world, she began as a colony, staved off
domestic strife by colonies, by empire, and by doles,[78] and was
already near the economic stage reached only centuries later by the
Roman Empire. Save for Rome, her polity might have endured on the
imperialist basis for centuries; but, as it was, it was socially
exhausted relatively to the task and the danger, depending as it did on
hired foreign troops and coerced allies. It is idle to speak, as men
still do, of Hannibal's stay in Capua as a fatal mistake.[79] Had
Hannibal taken Rome, the ultimate triumph of the Romans would have been
just as certain. Their State was bound to outlast the other, so long as
it maintained to any extent its old basis of a fecund rural population
of free cultivators, supplying a zealous soldiery, headed by a
specialised class equally dependent on conquest for all advancement. For
the trading Carthaginians, war was, beyond a certain point, a mere act
of self-defence; they could not have held and administered Italy had
they taken it. The supreme general could last only one lifetime; the
nation of warriors still yielded a succession of captains, always
learning something more of war, and raising the standard of capacity as
the progress of machinery widens the scope of all engineers.

     The author of a recent and meritorious _History of Rome_, Mr.
     Shuckburgh, is satisfied to quote (p. 231) from Polybius, as
     explaining the fall of Carthage, the generalisation that "Italians
     as a nation are by nature superior to Phoenicians and Libyans,
     both in strength of body and courage of soul"; and to add: "That is
     the root of the matter, from which all else is a natural growth."
     This only leaves us asking: "What was the natural root of the
     alleged physiological superiority?" There must have been reasons.
     If they were "racial" or climatic, whence the later implied
     degeneration of the Romans in body or soul, or both? We are driven
     to the explanation lying in polity and institutions, which it
     should have been Mr. Shuckburgh's special aim to give, undertaking
     as he does to deal with "the state of the countries conquered by
     the Romans." And such explanations are actually offered by Polybius
     (vi, 53).


¤ 6

And yet the deterioration of the Roman State is visibly as sure a
sequence as its progress. Nothing that men might then have proposed
could save it. In Cicero's day the Senate had become a den of thieves.
The spectacle of the wealth of Lucullus, taken in Napoleonic fashion
from the opulent East, set governor after governor elsewhere upon a
course of ruthless extortion which depraved Rome as infallibly as it
devastated the subject States.

Roman exploitation of conquest began in the relatively moderate fashion
of self-supporting victors willing to live and let live. Sicily was at
first (210) taxed by Marcellus in a fashion of which Livy makes
boast;[80] and after the suppression of the slaves' revolt in 131 B.C.,
the system was further reformed. Seventeen towns, retaining their lands,
paid a fixed tax to the Republic; eight were immune, save for an annual
contribution of 800,000 _modius_ of wheat for free doles in Rome; and
the rest of the island paid a tenth of all produce, as under Hiero.[81]
Later, the realms of the kings of Macedonia, Pergamos, and Bithynia, and
the lands of Cyrene and Cyprus, were made the public patrimony of the
conquering State. Sardinia, Spain, North Africa, and Asia were in
general taxed a tenth of their produce of all kinds. As the exploitation
went on, individual governors added to all this regular taxation a vast
irregular plunder on their own account; and nearly every attempt to
impeach them was foiled by their accomplices in the Senate.[82] Verres
in Sicily, Fonteius in Southern Gaul, Piso in Macedonia, Appius in
Cilicia, Flaccus in Asia Minor, wrung infinite gold and loot
immeasurable from the victim races by every device of rapacious
brigandage, trampling on every semblance of justice, and then devised
the ironic infamy of despatching corrupted or terrorised deputations of
citizens to Rome to testify to the beneficence of their rule.[83]

It was a riot of robbery in which no public virtue could live. To
moralise on the scarcity of Catos is an ill way of spending time if it
be not recognised that Catos had latterly become as impossible as eaters
of acorns in the upper grades of the ever-plundering State. Cato himself
is a product of the last vestiges of the stage before universal
conquest; and he begins to show in his own later years all the symptoms
of the period of lawless plutocracy. To yearn for a series of such
figures is to ask that men shall be capable of holding doggedly by an
ethic of honest barbarism while living the lives of pirates and slavers,
according no moral sympathy to the larger world of aliens and slaves,
yet cherishing a high public spirit for the small world of the patrician
State. The man himself was a mere moral anomaly; and in Cato the
Younger, dreaming to the last of a loyal republican life, but always
ready at his fellow-citizens' behest to go and beat down the rights or
liberties of any other State,[84] we have the paternal bias reproduced
in an incurable duality. He sought for honour among thieves, himself
being one. Concerning the Catonic attitude towards the "degeneration" of
Roman patrician life in the age of conquest, it has been truly said that
"the policy of shameless selfishness which was pursued by the Roman
Senate during this period, and reached its climax in their abominable
conduct towards the unhappy, prostrate city of Carthage--the frivolous
wars, tending to nothing but aggrandisement and enrichment, waged by
Rome continuously after the second Punic War--destroyed the old Roman
character[85] far more effectually than Grecian art and philosophy could
ever have done. Henceforth there was a fearful increase in internal
corruption, immorality, bribery, an insatiable eagerness for riches,
disregarding everything else and impudently setting aside laws, orders
of the Senate, and legal proceedings, making war unauthorised,
celebrating triumphs without permission, plundering the provinces,
robbing the allies."[86] And the ideal of conquest inspired it all.

We have only to ask ourselves, What was the administrative class to do?
in order to see the fatality of its course. The State must needs go on
seeking conquest, by reason alike of the lower-class and the upper-class
problem. The administrators must administer, or rust. The moneyed men
must have fresh plunder, fresh sources of profit. The proletaries must
be either fed or set fighting, else they would clamour and revolt. And
as the frontiers of resistance receded, and new war was more and more a
matter of far-reaching campaigns, the large administering class at home,
men of action devoid of progressive culture, ran to brutal vice and
frantic sedition as inevitably as returned sailors to debauch; while the
distant leader, passing years of camp life at the head of professional
troops, became more and more surely a power extraneous to the Republic.
When a State comes to depend for its coherence on a standing army, the
head of the army inevitably becomes the head of the State. The Republic
passed, as a matter of course, into the Empire, with its army of
mercenaries, the senatorial class having outlived the main conditions of
its health and energetic stability; the autocracy at once began to
delete the remaining brains by banishing or slaying all who openly
criticised it;[87] and the Empire, even while maintaining its power by
the spell of its great traditional organisation, ran through stage after
stage of civic degeneration under good and bad emperors alike, simply
because it had and could have no intellectual life commensurate with its
physical scope. Its function involved moral atrophy. It needs the
strenuous empiricism of a Mommsen to find ground for comfort in the
apparition of a C¾sar in a State that must needs worsen under C¾sars
even more profoundly than it did before its malady gave C¾sar his
opportunity.

Not that the Empire could of itself have died as an organism. There are
no such deaths in politics; and the frequent use of the phrase testifies
to a hallucination that must greatly hamper political science. The
ancient generalisation[88] to the youth, maturity, and decrepitude and
death of States is true only in respect of their variations of relative
military and economic strength, which follow no general rule.

     The comparison of the life of political bodies to that of
     individuals was long ago rightly rejected as vicious by Volney
     (_Leons d'Histoire_, 1794, 6ime SŽance), who insisted that
     political destruction occurred only through vices of polity,
     inasmuch as all polities have been framed with one of the three
     intentions of _increasing_, _maintaining_, or _overthrowing_. The
     explanation is obscure, but the negation of the old formula is
     just. The issue was taken up and pronounced upon to the same effect
     in the closing chapter of C.A. Walckenaer's _Essai sur l'histoire
     de l'espce humaine_, 1798. (Professor Flint, in his _History of
     the Philosophy of History_, cites Walckenaer, but does not mention
     Volney's _Leons_.) Le Play, in modern times, has put the truth
     clearly and strongly: "At no epoch of its history is a people
     fatally doomed either to progress or decline. It does not
     necessarily pass, like an individual, from youth to old age" (cited
     by H. Higgs in _American Quarterly Journal of Economics_, July,
     1890, p. 428). It is to be regretted that Dr. Draper should have
     adhered to the fallacy of the necessary decay and death of nations
     in his suggestive work on the _Intellectual Development of Europe_
     (ed. 1875, i, 13-20; ii, 393-98). He was doubtless influenced by
     the American tendency to regard Europe and Asia as groups of "old
     countries." The word "decay" may of course be used with the
     implication of mere "sickness," as by Lord Mahon in the opening
     sentence of his _Life of Belisarius_; but even in that use it gives
     a lead to fallacy.

Had there been no swarming and aggressive barbarians, standing to later
Rome as Rome had done to Carthage--collectively exigent of moral
equality as Romans had once been, and therefore conjunctly mighty as
against the morally etiolated Italians--the Western Roman Empire would
have gone on just as the Eastern[89] so long did, just as China has so
long done--would have subsisted with little or no progress, most factors
of progress being eliminated from its sphere. It ought now to be
unnecessary to point out that Christianity was no such factor, but
rather the reverse, as the history of Byzantium so thoroughly proves. No
Christian writer of antiquity, save perhaps Augustine[90] in a moment of
moral aspiration, shows any perception of the political causation of
the decay and fall of the Empire.[91] The forces of intellectual
progress that did arise and collapse in the decline and the Dark Ages
were extra-Christian heretical forces--Sabellian, Arian, Pelagian,
anti-ritualistic, anti-monastic, Iconoclastic. These once deleted,
Christianity was no more a progressive force among the new peoples than
it was among the old; and the later European progress demonstrably came
from wholly different causes--new empire, forcing partial peace; Saracen
contact, bringing physics, chemistry, and mathematics; new discovery,
making new commerce; recovery of pagan lore, making new speculation;
printing, making books abundant; gunpowder, making arms a specialty; and
the fresh competition and disruption of States, setting up fruitful
differences, albeit also preparing new wars. To try to trace these
causes in detail would be to attempt a complete sociological sketch of
European history, a task far beyond the scope of the present work;
though we shall later make certain special surveys that may suffice to
illustrate the general law. In the meantime, the foregoing and other
bird's-eye views of some ancient developments may illustrate those of
modern times.
