



CHAPTER IV

THE LAWS OF SOCIO-POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT


¤ 1

The word "progressive," however, raises one of the most complex issues
in sociology. It would be needless to point out, were it not well to
anticipate objection, that the foregoing summaries are not offered as a
complete theory of progress even as commonly conceived, much less as
sufficing to dismiss the dispute[134] as to what progress is, or what
basis there is for the modern conceptions bound up with the word. Our
generalisations proceed on the assumption--not of course that human
affairs must constantly improve in virtue of some cosmic law, but--that
by most men of any education a certain advance in range of knowledge, of
reflection, of skill, of civic amenity, of general comfort, is held to
be attainable and desirable; that such advances have clearly taken place
in former periods; and that the due study of these periods and of
present conditions may lead to a further and indefinitely prolonged
advance. Conceiving progress broadly as occurring by way of rise in the
quantity and the quality of pleasurable and intelligent life, we beg the
question, for the purposes of this inquiry, as against those who may
regard such a tendency with aversion, and those who may deny that such
increase ever takes place. Taking as proved the evolution of mankind
from lower forms of animal life, we conceive such evolution as
immeasurably slow in the period before the attainment of agriculture,
which may serve as the stage at which what we term "civilisation"
begins. Only with agriculture begins the "civitas," as distinct from the
horde or tribe. Thenceforth all advance in arts and ethics, no less than
in political co-ordination, counts as "civilisation." The problem is,
how to diagnose advance.

All of us, roughly speaking, understand by progress the moving of things
in the way we want them to go; and the ideals underlying the present
treatise are easily seen, though it does not aim at an exhaustive survey
of the conditions and causes of what it assumes to be progressive forms
or phases of civilisation. To reach even a working theory, however, we
have to make, as it were, cross-sections in our anatomy, and to view the
movement of civilisation in terms of the conditions which increase men's
stock of knowledge and extend their imaginative art. To lay a
foundation, we have to subsume Buckle's all-important generalisation as
to the effect of food and life conditions in differentiating what we may
broadly term the primary from the secondary civilisation. Thus we think
from "civilisation" to _a_ civilisation.

     Buckle drew his capital distinction, so constantly ignored by his
     critics, between "European" and "non-European" civilisations. This
     broadly holds good, but is a historical rather than a sociological
     proposition. The process of causation is one of life conditions;
     and the first great steps in the higher Greek civilisation were
     made in Asia Minor, in contact with Asiatic life, even as the
     earlier civilisations, such as the "Minoan" of Crete, now being
     traced through recovered remains, grew up in contact with both
     Egypt and the East. (Cp. Prof. Burrows, _The Discoveries in Crete_,
     1907, chs. v, ix.) The distinction here made between "primary" and
     "secondary" civilisations is of course merely relative, applying as
     it does only to the historic period. We can but mark off the known
     civilisations as standing in certain relations one to another. Thus
     the Roman civilisation was in reality complex before the conquest
     of Greece, inasmuch as it had undergone Italo-Greek and Etruscan
     influences representing a then ancient culture. But the Roman
     militarist system left the Roman civilisation in itself
     unprogressive, and prevented it from being durably fertilised by
     the Greek.

Proceeding from general laws to particular cases, we may roughly say
that:--

(1) Primary civilisations arise in regions specially favourable to the
regular production of abundant food, and lying inland, so as not to
offer constant temptation to piratical raids. (Fertile coast land is
defensible only by a strong community.)

(2) Such food conditions tend to maintain an abundant population,
readily lending itself to exploitation by rulers, and so involving
despotism and subordination. They also imply, as a rule, level
territories, which facilitate conquest and administration, and thus also
involve military autocracy.

     The general law that facile food conditions, supporting large
     populations in a primary civilisation, generate despotisms, was
     explicitly put in the eighteenth century by Walckenaer (_Essai sur
     l'histoire de l'espce humaine_, 1798, l. v, ch. iv, p. 198).
     Montesquieu, whose reasonings on climate and soil tend to be
     fanciful and non-economic (cp. Volney, _Leons d'Histoire_, 6ime
     sŽance; and Buckle, Routledge's ed. pp. 24, 468-69), noted the fact
     that sterile Attica was relatively democratic, and fertile
     Lakedaimon aristocratic; and further (following Plutarch) decides
     that mountaineers tend to be democratic, plain-dwellers subject to
     rulers, and coast-dwellers something midway between (_Esprit des
     Lois_, l. xviii, ch. i). He is right in his facts, but misses the
     economic explanation. The fact that mountaineers as such are not
     easy to conquer, doubtless counts for a good deal. See it touched
     on in Gray's unfinished poem on the _Alliance between Government
     and Education_, written before the appearance of the _Esprit des
     Lois_, and stopped by Gray on the ground that "the Baron had
     forestalled some of his best thoughts" (Gray's _Works_, ed. 1821,
     p. 274). The point is discussed more fully in Dr. Dunbar's _Essays
     on the History of Mankind_, 1780, Essay vi.

(3) If the nation with such conditions is well aloof from other nations,
in virtue of being much more civilised than its near neighbours, and of
being self-sufficing as regards its produce, its civilisation (as in the
cases of China and Incarial Peru and ancient Egypt) is likely to be
extremely conservative. Above all, lack of racial interbreeding involves
lack of due variation. No "pure" race ever evolved rapidly or highly.
Even the conservative primary civilisations (as the Egyptian, Chinese,
and Akkadian) rested on much race mixture.

     As Dr. Draper has well pointed out (_Intellect. Develop. of
     Europe_, ed. 1875, i, 84-88), the peculiar regularity of Egyptian
     agriculture, depending as it did on the Nile overflow, which made
     known in advance the quantity of the crops, lent itself especially
     to a stable system of life and administration. The long-lasting
     exclusion of foreigners there, as in China and in Sparta, would
     further secure sameness of culture; and only by such causes can
     special unprogressiveness anywhere arise. Sir Henry Maine's
     formula, marking off progressive and unprogressive civilisations as
     different species, is merely verbal, and is not adhered to by
     himself. (The point is discussed at some length by the present
     writer in _Buckle and his Critics_, pp. 402-8.) Maine's distinction
     was drawn long ago by Eusbe Salverte (_De la Civilisation depuis
     les premiers temps_, 1813, p. 22, _seq._), who philosophically goes
     on to indicate the conditions which set up the differentiation;
     though in later references (_Essai sur les noms d'hommes_, 1824,
     prŽf. p. ii; _Des Sciences occultes_, 1829, prŽf. p. vi) he recurs
     to the empirical form of his proposition, which is that adhered to
     by Maine.

(4) When an old civilisation comes in steady contact with that of a race
of not greatly inferior but less ancient culture, physically so situated
as to be much less amenable to despotism (that is, in a hilly or
otherwise easily defensible region), it is likely so to fecundate the
fresher civilisation that the latter, if not vitiated by a bad political
system, will soon surpass it,[135] provided that the latter community in
turn is duly crossed as regards its stock, and that the former has due
resources.

(5) In other words, a primitive but not barbarous people, placed in a
region not highly fruitful but not really unpropitious to human life, is
the less likely to fall tamely under a despotism because its population
is not so easily multiplied and maintained;[136] and such a people, when
physiologically variated by a mixture of stocks, and when mentally
fecundated by contact with older civilisations, tends to develop what we
term a secondary civilisation, higher in all respects than those which
have stimulated it.[137]

(6) A very great disparity in the culture-stages of meeting races,
however, is as unfavourable to the issue of a higher civilisation from
their union as to a useful blending of their stocks.[138] Thus it fares
ill with the contact of higher and lower races even in a climate equally
favourable to both; and where it is favourable to the latter only, there
is likely to be no immediate progress in the lower race, while in the
terms of the case the higher will deteriorate or disappear.[139]

(7) Where a vigorous but barbarian race overruns one much more
civilised, there is similarly little prospect of immediate gain to
progress, though after a period of independent growth the newer
civilisation may be greatly fecundated by intelligent resort to the
remains of the older.

     The cases of China and the Roman Empire may serve as illustrations.
     They were, however, different in that the northern invasion of Rome
     was by relatively considerable masses, while the Tartar conquerors
     of China were easily absorbed in the vast native population.

(8) Where, again, independent States at nearly the same stage of
civilisation, whether speaking the same or different languages, stand in
a position of commerce and rivalry, but without desperate warfare, the
friction and cross-fertilisation of ideas, together with the mixture of
stocks, will develop a greater and higher intellectual and artistic life
than can conceivably arise in one great State without great or close
rivals, since there one set of ideals or standards is likely to overbear
all others, with the result of partly stereotyping taste and opinion.

     This point is well put by Hume as to Greece, in his essay _Of the
     Rise of the Arts and Sciences_ (1752); and after him by Gibbon, ch.
     53, Bohn ed. vi, 233; Cp. Heeren, _Pol. Hist. of Ancient Greece_,
     Eng. tr. p. 42; Walckenaer, _Essai_ cited, p. 338; Ferguson, _Essay
     on the History of Civil Society_, 1767, pp. 182, 183; Dunbar,
     _Essays on the History of Mankind_, 1780, pp. 257, 271; Goguet, _De
     l'origine des lois, des arts, et des sciences_, 1758, iii Epoque,
     L. ii, ch. 2; Salverte, _De la Civilisation_, 1813, pp. 83-88;
     Grote, _History of Greece_, pt. ii, ch. i, ed. 1888, ii, 156;
     Cunningham, _Western Civilisation_, i, 75. Grote brings out very
     clearly the "mutuality of action and reaction" in the case of the
     maritime Greeks as compared with the others and with other nations.
     See also Hegel, _Philos. der Geschichte_, Th. ii, Absch. i (ed.
     1840, p. 275). Hegel, besides noting the abstract element of
     geographical variety, points to the highly mixed character of the
     Greek stocks, especially in Attica. So Salverte, as cited. The same
     principle is rightly put by Guizot (_Hist. de la civilisation en
     France_, i, leon 2), and accepted by J.S. Mill (_On Liberty_, ch.
     iii, end), as a main explanation of the intellectual progress of
     modern Europe. It is therefore worth weighing as regards given
     peoples, by those who, like Mr. Bryce, see nothing but harm in the
     subdivision of Germany after the Thirty Years' War (_Holy Roman
     Empire_, 8th ed. p. 346). Against the undoubted evils connected
     with the partition system ought to be set the intellectual gains
     which latterly arose from it when the intellectual life of Germany
     had, as it were, recovered breath.

(9) Thus, while an empire with a developed civilisation may communicate
it to uncivilised conquered peoples not too far below its own
anthropological level, the secondary civilisation thus acquired is in
its nature less "viable," less capable of independent evolution, than
one set up by the free commerce of trading peoples. The most rapid
growths of civilisation appear always to have occurred by way of the
multiplying of free contacts among trading communities, and among the
free colonies of such.[140] The "money economy" they introduced was a
great instrument of social and industrial evolution;[141] and on such
city civilisations the ancient empires themselves seem always to have
proceeded.[142]

(10) Every phase of civilisation has its special drawbacks, so that
great retrogression may follow on great development, especially when
adventitious sources of wealth are the foundation of a luxurious
culture. In some cases a great development may be dependent on an
exhaustible source of wealth, as in the case of Britain's coal supply,
the empire of ancient Rome, the primacy of the Pope before the
Reformation, or even the Periclean empire of Athens, and the trade
monopolies of Venice, the Hansa Towns, and the Dutch Republic.

(11) The expression "decay" as applied to a people, however, has only a
relative significance: used absolutely, it stands for a delusion.
Economic conditions may worsen, and military power decline; but such
processes imply no physiological degeneration. All the "dead"
civilisations of the past were _overthrown or absorbed by military
violence_; and there is no known case of a nation physically well placed
dying out.

     Professor W.D. Whitney, who is usually so well worth listening to,
     fails to recognise this fact in his interesting essay on "China and
     the Chinese" (_Oriental and Linguistic Studies_, 2nd series). He
     declares that "according to the ordinary march of events in human
     history, the Chinese empire should have perished from decay, and
     its culture either have become extinct or have passed into the
     keeping of another race, more than two thousand years ago. It had
     already reached the limit to its capacity of development" (p. 88).
     Similarly Ratzel pronounces (_History of Mankind_, Eng. tr. 1896,
     i, 26) that "Voltaire hits the point when he says Nature has given
     the Chinese the organ for discovering all that is _useful_ to them,
     but not for going _any further_." Voltaire never penned such a
     "bull." He wrote (_Essai sur les moeurs_, Avant-Propos, ch. i),
     "Il _semble_ que la Nature ait donnŽ," and "_nŽcessaire_," not
     "useful." Even that has a touch of paralogism; but the great
     essayist goes on to suggest two causes for Chinese
     conservatism--their ancestral piety and the nature of their method
     of writing. The first is a pseudo-explanation; the second is a
     _vera causa_, though only one of those involved. The German
     specialist of to-day is really further from the scientific point of
     view than the French wit of the middle of the eighteenth century,
     going on as he does to decide that "defect in their endowments"
     causes the mediocrity of the Chinese, and "also is the sole cause
     of the rigidity in their social system."

     This is a vain saying; and it is no less vain to go on to ask, as
     Professor Whitney does, what has become of Egypt, of the
     Phoenicians and Hebrews, of the Persians, of Greece and Rome, and
     of Spain. The answer is easy. Egypt was conquered, and the old race
     still reproduces itself, in vassalage. The "Pelasgic" civilisation
     of ancient Greece was absorbed by the Greek invaders. The
     "Mycen¾an" and "Minoan" civilisations, as seen in ancient Troy and
     "Minoan" Crete, were conquered and partly absorbed. The
     Phoenicians and Hebrews were destroyed or absorbed. The Persians
     are at present retrograde, but may rise again.[143] Rome and Greece
     were successively overrun by barbarism. Spain, like Italy,
     retrograded, but, like Italy, is on the path of regeneration. In
     all these cases the process of causation is obvious. No nation dies
     or disappears save by violence; and, given the proper conditions,
     all races are capable of progress indefinitely. China, though
     unprogressive in comparison with a European State, has changed in
     many respects within two thousand years--nay, within twenty.[144]
     Professor Whitney adopts an empirical convention, and accordingly
     misses any real elucidation of the problem of Chinese sociology,
     which he assumes to solve (p. 87) by saying we must look for our
     explanations "deep in the foundations of the national character
     itself." That is to say, the national character is determined by
     the national character.

     It is surely time that this pal¾o-theological fashion of explaining
     human affairs were superseded by the more fruitful method of
     positive science, even as regards China, which is perhaps the worst
     explained of all sociological cases. Like others, it had been
     intelligently taken up by sociologists of the eighteenth century
     before the conservative reaction (see the _Esprit des Lois_, vii,
     6; viii, 21; x, 15; xiv, 8; xviii, 6; xix, 13-20; Dunbar's
     _Essays_, as cited, pp. 257, 258, 262, 263, 321; and Walckenaer,
     _Essai_ cited, pp. 175, 176); but that impetus seems to have been
     thus far almost entirely lost. Voltaire's fallacy is remembered and
     his truth ignored; and the methods of theology continue to be
     applied to many questions of moral science after they have been
     wholly cast out of physics and biology. The old "falsisms" of
     empirical politics are repeated even by professed biologists when
     they enter on the field of social science. Thus we have seen them
     accepted by Dr. Draper, and we find Professor Huxley (_Evolution
     and Ethics_, Romanes Lecture for 1893, p. 4) rhetorically putting
     "that successive rise, apogee, and fall of dynasties and states
     which is the most prominent topic of civil history," as
     scientifically analogous to the process of growth and decay and
     death in the human organism. Any comparative study of history shows
     the analogy to be spurious. Professor Whitney was doubtless
     influenced, like Dr. Draper, by the American habit of regarding
     European and ancient civilisations as necessarily decrepit because
     "slow" and "old." Cp. Draper as cited, ii, 393-98.

In the cases above dealt with, however, and in many others, there is
seen to have been _intellectual_ decay, in the sense of, first, a
cessation of forward movement, and, next, a loss of the power to
appreciate ideas once current. A common cause of such paralysis of the
higher life is the malignant action of dogmatic religious systems, as in
the cases of Persia, Jewry, Byzantium, Islam, Spain under Catholicism,
and Scotland for two centuries under Protestantism. Such paralysis by
religion may arise alike in a highly-organised but isolated State like
Byzantium, and in a semi-civilised country like Anglo-Saxon
England.[145] The special malignity of dogma in these cases is itself of
course a matter for analysis and explanation. Other cases are partly to
be explained by (_a_) the substitution of systematic militarism, always
fatal to progressive culture, for a life of only occasional warfare,
favourable to study among the leisured class.[146] But (_b_) there is
reason to surmise a further and profoundly important cause of
intellectual retrogression in the usage which develops the culture of a
people for the most part in one sex only. The thesis may be ventured
that whereas vigorous and creative brains may arise in abundance in a
young civilisation, where the sexes are physiologically not far removed
from the approximate equality of the semi-barbarous stage, the
psychological divergence set up by mentally and physically training the
males and not the females is likely to be unfavourable to the breeding
of mentally energetic types.

(12) Whether or not the last hypothesis be valid, it is clear that the
co-efficient or constituent of intellectual progress in a people, given
the necessary conditions of peace and sufficient food, is multiplication
of ideas; and this primarily results from international contact, or the
contact of wholly or partly independent communities of one people.
Multiplication of arts and crafts is of course included under the head
of ideas. But unless the stock of ideas is not merely in constant
process of being added to among the studious or leisured class, but
disseminated among the other classes, stagnation will take place among
these, and will inevitably infect the educated class.

     De Tocqueville, balancing somewhat inconclusively, because always
     _in vacuo_, the forces affecting literature in aristocratic and
     democratic societies, says decisively enough (_DŽmocratie en
     AmŽrique_, ed. 1850, ii, 62-63) that "Toute aristocratie qui se met
     entirement ˆ part du peuple devient impuissante. Cela est vrai
     dans les lettres aussi bien qu'en politique." This holds clearly
     enough of Italian literature in the despotic period. Mr. Godkin's
     criticism (_Problems of Modern Democracy_, p. 56) that "M. de
     Tocqueville and all his followers take it for granted that the
     great incentive to excellence, in all countries in which excellence
     is found, is the patronage and encouragement of an aristocracy," is
     hardly accurate. De Tocqueville puts the case judicially enough, so
     far as he goes; and Mr. Godkin falls into strange extravagance in
     his counter statement that there is "hardly a single historical
     work composed prior to the end of the last [eighteenth] century,
     except perhaps Gibbon's, which, judged by the standard that the
     criticism of our day has set up, would not, though written for the
     'few,' be pronounced careless, slipshod, or superficial."
     Tillemont, by the testimony of Professor Bury, was a more thorough
     worker in his special line than Gibbon. It would be easy to name
     scores of writers in various branches of history in the seventeenth
     and eighteenth centuries whom no good critic to-day would call
     careless or slipshod; and if Hume and Robertson, Clarendon and
     Burnet, be termed superficial, the "standard" will involve a
     similar characterisation of most historical writers of our own day.
     As regards present-day literary productions, De Tocqueville and Mr.
     Godkin alike omit the necessary economic analysis.

(13) In the intellectual infectiousness of all class degradation,
properly speaking, lies the final sociological (as apart from the
primary ethical) condemnation of slavery. The familiar argument that
slavery first secured the leisure necessary for culture, even were it
wholly instead of being merely partially true, would not rebut the
censure that falls to be passed on slavery in later stages of
civilisation. All the ancient States, before Greece, stood on slavery:
then it was not slavery that yielded her special culture. What she
gained from older civilisations was the knowledge and the arts developed
by _specialisation_ of pursuits; and such specialisation was not
necessarily dependent on slavery, which could abound without it. It was
in the special employment, finally, of the exceptionally large _free_
population of Athens that the greatest artistic output was reached.[147]
In later periods, the slave population was the great nucleus of
superstition and anti-culture.

Inasmuch, then, as education is in only a small degree compatible with
toilsome poverty, the betterment of the material conditions of the
toiling class is essential to progress in ideas. That is to say,
continual progress implies gradual elimination of class inequality, and
cannot subsist otherwise. At the same time, a culture-class must be
maintained by new machinery when leisured wealth is got rid of.[148]

(14) Again, it follows from the foregoing (4-10) that the highest
civilisation will be that in which the greatest number of varying
culture-influences meet,[149] in the most happily-crossed stock, under
climatic conditions favourable to energy, on a basis of a civilisation
sufficiently matured.[150] But in order to the effectual action of such
various culture-influences through all classes of the nation in which
they meet, there is needed a constant application of social or political
regimen. In the lack of that, a great conflux of culture-forces may miss
fruition. A mere fortuitous depression of the rich class, and elevation
of the poor, will not suffice to place a society on a sound or even on
an improved footing. Such a change occurred in ancient Athens after
Salamis, when the poorer sort, who had constituted the navy,
flourished[151] as against the richer, who had been the land soldiery,
and whose lands had been ravaged. But the forces of disintegration
played afresh. Yet again, transient financial conditions, such as those
of Italy before the Reformation, of Holland until the decline of its
fishing and trade, and of Venice until its final commercial decay, may
sustain a great artistic life, art having always depended on private or
public demand. Thus with a change in the geographical course of trade, a
great phase of culture-life may dwindle. So many and so complex are the
forces and conditions of progress in civilisation.


¤ 2

It will readily be seen that most of the foregoing propositions have
direct reference to well-known facts of history. Thus (_a_) ancient
Egypt represents a primary civilisation, marked indeed by some
fluctuations connected with dynastic changes which involved mixture of
stocks, but on the whole singularly fixed; while ancient Greek
civilisation was emphatically a secondary one, the fruit of much
race-mixture and many interacting culture-forces, all facilitated by the
commercial position and coast-conformation of Hellas.

     This view is partly rejected by Grote in two passages (pt. i, chs.
     xvi, xvii, ed. 1888, i, 326, 413) in which he gives to the
     "inherent and expansive force" of "the Greek mind" the main credit
     of Greek civilisation. But his words, to begin with, are confused
     and contradictory: "The transition of the Greek mind from its
     poetical to its comparatively positive stage was self-operated,
     accomplished by its own inherent and expansive force--_aided
     indeed, but by no means either impressed or provoked_ from
     without." In the second place, there is no basis for the denial of
     "impression or provocation" from without. And finally, what is
     decisive, the historian himself has in other passages acknowledged
     that the Greeks received from Asia and Egypt just such
     "provocation" as is seen to take place in varying degrees in the
     culture-contacts of all nations (chs. xv, xvi, pp. 307, 329). Of
     the contact with Egypt he expressly says that it "enlarged the
     range of their thoughts and observations." His whole treatment of
     the rise of culture, however, is meagre and imperfect relatively to
     his ample study of the culture itself. Later students grow more and
     more unanimous as to the composite character of the Greek-speaking
     stock in the earliest traceable periods of Hellenic life (cp. Bury,
     _History of Greece_, ed. 1906, pp. 39-42, and Professor Burrows,
     _The Discoveries in Crete_, 1907, p. 144), and the consequent
     complexity of the entire Hellenic civilisation. The case is
     suggestively put by Eduard Meyer (_Geschichte des Alterthums_, ii,
     155) in the observation that while the west coast of Greece had as
     many natural advantages as the eastern, it remained backward in
     civilisation when the other had progressed far. "_Here there lacked
     the foreign stimulus_: the west of Greece is away from the source
     of culture. Here, accordingly, primitive conditions continued to
     rule, while in the east a higher culture evolved itself.... Corinth
     in the older period played no part whatever, whether in story or in
     remains." The same proposition was put a generation ago by A.
     Bertrand, who pointed out that the coasts of Elis and Messenia are
     "incomparably more fertile" than those of Argolis and Attica
     (_ƒtudes de mythologie et d'archŽologie grecques_, 1858, pp.
     40-41); and again by Winwood Reade in _The Martyrdom of Man_ (1872,
     p. 64): "A glance at the map is sufficient to explain why it was
     that Greece became civilised before the other European lands. It is
     nearest to those countries in which civilisation first arose ...
     compelled to grow towards Asia as a tree grows towards the light."
     But to this generalisation should be put the qualifying clause
     (above, p. 55) that fertile coasts when developed are defensible
     only by a strongly organised community. Thus an early exploitation
     of Elis and Messenia would be checked by piracy.

     The question as to the originality of Greek culture, it is
     interesting to note, was already discussed at the beginning of the
     eighteenth century. See Shaftesbury's _Characteristics_, Misc. iii,
     ch. i.

(_b_) The Greek land as a whole, especially the Attic, was only
moderately fertile, and therefore not so cheaply and redundantly
populated as Egypt.

     The bracing effect of their relative poverty was fully recognised
     by the Greeks themselves. Cp. Herodotus, vii, 102, and Thucydides,
     i, 123. See on the same point Heeren, _Political History of Ancient
     Greece_, Eng. tr. pp. 24-33; Thirlwall, _History of Greece_, small
     ed. i, 12; Duncker, _Gesch. des Alterthums_, iii, ch. i, ¤ 1;
     Wachsmuth, _Hist. Antiq. of the Greeks_, ¤ 8; Duruy, _Hist.
     Grecque_, 1851, p. 7; Grote, part ii, ch. i (ed. 1888, ii, 160);
     Boeckh, _Public Economy of Athens_, B. i, c. 8; Niebuhr,
     _Lectures_, li (Eng. tr. 3rd ed. p. 265); Mahaffy, _Rambles and
     Studies in Greece_, 4th ed. pp. 137, 164-67. Dr. Grundy
     (_Thucydides and the History of his Age_, 1911, p. 58 _sq._) lays
     stress on the fertility of the valleys, but recognises the
     smallness of the fertile areas.

(_c_) Hellas was further so decisively cut up into separate cantons by
its mountain ranges, and again in respect of the multitude of the
islands, that the Greek districts were largely foreign to each
other,[152] and their cultures had thus the advantage of reacting and
interacting, as against the disadvantage of their incurable political
separateness--that disadvantage in turn being correlative with the
advantage of insusceptibility to a despotism.

     The effect of geographical conditions on Greek history is discussed
     at length in Conrad Bursian's essay, _Ueber den Einfluss des
     griechischen Landes auf den Charakter seiner Bewohner_, which I
     have been unable to procure or see; but I gather from his
     _Geographie von Griechenlands_ that he takes the view here set
     forth. Cp. Senior's _Journal kept in Turkey and Greece_, 1859, p.
     255, for a modern Greek's view of the state of his nation,
     "divided into small districts by mountain ranges intersecting each
     other in all directions without a road or canal"; the deduction
     from the same perception made by the young Arthur Stanley
     (Prothero's _Life of Dean Stanley_, 1-vol. ed. p. 143); and the
     impression retained from his travels by M. Bertrand, _ƒtudes de
     mythologie et d'archŽologie grecques_, 1858, p. 199.

     The profound importance of the geographical fact has been
     recognised more or less clearly and fully by many writers--_e.g._,
     Hume, essay Of the _Rise and Progress of the Arts and the Sciences_
     (ed. 1825 of _Essays_, i, 115-16); Gillies, _History of Greece_,
     1-vol. ed. p. 5; Heeren, as cited, pp. 35, 75; Duncker, as last
     cited, also ch. iii, ¤ 12 (2te Aufl. 1860, p. 601); Duruy, ch. i;
     Cox, _General History of Greece_, bk. i, ch. i; Thirlwall, ch. x;
     Wachsmuth, Eng. tr. i, 87; Comte, _Cours de Philosophie Positive_,
     Leon 53ime; Grote, pt. ii, ch. i (ii, 155); Finlay, _History of
     Greece_, Tozer's ed. i, 28; K.O. MŸller, _Introd. to Scientific
     Mythology_, Eng. tr. p. 179; Hegel, as last cited; Hertzberg,
     _Geschichte von Hellas und Rom_, 1879 (in Oncken's series), i, 9;
     Winwood Reade, _The Martyrdom of Man_, 1872, p. 65 sq.; Bury,
     _History of Greece_, ed. 1906, pp. 2-4; Fyffe (very explicitly),
     _Primer of Greek History_, p. 8--but it is strangely overlooked by
     writers to whom one turns for a careful study of causes. Even
     Grote, after having clearly set forth (ii, 150) the predetermining
     influence of land-form, attributes Greek divisions to the
     "character of the race," which even in this connection, however, he
     describes as "splitting _by natural fracture_ into a multitude of
     self-administering, indivisible cities" (pt. ii, ch. 28,
     beginning); and Sir George Cox, after specifying the geographical
     factor, speaks of it as merely "fostering" a love of isolation
     _resulting_ from "political creed." Freeman (_History of Federal
     Government_) does not seem to apply the geographical fact to the
     explanation of any phase of Greek history, though he sees in Greece
     (ed. 1893, pp. 92, 554) "each valley and peninsula and island
     marked out by the hand of nature for an independent being," and
     quotes (p. 559) Cant as to the effect of land-form on history in
     Italy. In so many words he pronounces (p. 101) that the love of
     town-autonomy was "inherent in the Greek mind." Mr. Warde Fowler
     (_City-State of the Greeks and Romans_) does not once give heed to
     the geographical conditions of causation, always speaking of the
     Greeks as lacking the "faculty" of union as compared with the
     Latins, though the Eastern Empire finally showed greater cohesive
     power than the Western. Even Mr. Fyffe (_Primer_ cited, p. 127),
     despite his preliminary recognition of the facts, finally speaks of
     the Greeks as relatively lacking in the "gift for government."

     The same assumption is made in Lord Morley's _Compromise_ (ed.
     1888, p. 108) in the allusion to "peoples so devoid of the
     sovereign faculty of political coherency as were the Greeks and
     the Jews." Lord Morley's proposition is that such peoples may
     still evolve great civilising ideas; but though that is true, the
     implied thesis as to "faculty" weakens even the truth. The case of
     the Jews is to be explained in exactly the same way as that of the
     Greeks, the face of Palestine being disjunct and segregate in a
     peculiar degree. Other "Semites," living in great plains, were
     united in great monarchies. The sound view of the case as to Rome
     is put by Hertzberg: "Soll man im Gegensatze zu der hellenischen
     Geschichte es in kŸrzester Fassung bezeichnen, so kann man etwa
     sagen, die italische Landesnatur stellte der Ausbildung eines
     grossen _einheitlich_ geordneten Staates durchaus nicht die
     gewaltigen Hindernisse entgegen, wie das in Griechenland der Fall
     war" (_Gesch. von Hellas und Rom_, ii, 7). Cp. Shuckburgh, _History
     of Rome_, 1894, p. 9, as to "the vast heights which effectually
     separate tribes." Dr. Cunningham puts it (_Western Civilisation_,
     i, 152, 160) that Roman expansion in Italy came of the need to
     reach a true frontier of defence, in the lack of physical barriers
     to the early States. (So Lord Cromer, _Anc. and Mod. Imperialism_,
     1910, p. 19.) It seems more plausible to say that all of the States
     concerned were positively disposed to conquest, and that the
     physical conditions of Italy made possible an overrunning which in
     early Greece was impossible.

     The theory of "faculty," consistently applied on Mr. Fowler's and
     Lord Morley's lines, would credit the French with an innate gift of
     union much superior to that of the Germans--at least in the modern
     period--and the Chinese with the greatest "faculty" of all. But the
     long maintenance of one rule over all China is clearly due in large
     part to the "great facility of internal intercourse" (Davis, _The
     Chinese_, Introd.) so long established. The Roman roads were half
     the secret of the cohesion of the Empire. Dr. Draper suggests,
     ingeniously but inaccurately, that Rome had strength and permanence
     because of lying east and west, and thus possessing greater racial
     homogeneity than it would have had if it lay north and south
     (_Intel. Devel. of Europe_, _i_, 11). On the other hand,
     mountainous Switzerland remains still cantonally separate, though
     the pressure of surrounding States, beginning with that of Austria,
     forced a political union. Compare the case of the clans of the
     Scottish Highlands down to the road-making period after the last
     Jacobite rising. See the principle discussed in Mr. Spencer's
     _Principles of Sociology_, i, ¤ 17.

     It may be well, before leaving the subject, to meet the important
     criticism of the geographical principle by Fustel de Coulanges (_La
     CitŽ antique_, liv. iii, ch. xiv, p. 238, Ždit. 1880). Noting that
     the incurable division of the Greeks has been attributed to the
     nature of their land, and that it has been said that the
     intersecting mountains established lines of natural demarcation
     among men, he goes on to argue: "But there are no mountains
     between Thebes and Plat¾a, between Argos and Sparta, between
     Sybaris and Crotona. There were none between the towns of Latium,
     or between the twelve cities of Etruria. Physical nature has
     doubtless some influence on the history of peoples, but the beliefs
     of men have a much greater. Between two neighbouring cities there
     was something more impassable than a mountain--to wit, the series
     of sacred limits, the difference of cults, the barrier which each
     city set up between the stranger and its Gods."

     All this, so far as it goes, is substantially true, but it does not
     at all conflict with the principle as above set forth. Certainly
     all cities, like all tribes, were primarily separatist; though even
     in religious matters there was some measure of early peaceful
     inter-influence, and a certain tendency to syncresis as well as to
     separateness. (Cp. K.O. MŸller, _Dorians_, Eng. tr. i, 228.) But
     the principle is not special to the cities of Greece. Cities and
     tribes were primarily separatist in Babylonia and in Egypt. How,
     then, were these regions nevertheless monarchised at an early
     period? Clearly by reason of the greater invitingness and
     feasibility of conquest in such territories--for their unification
     was forcible. The conditions had thus both an objective and a
     subjective, a suggestive and a permissive force, both lacking in
     Greece. Again, the twelve cities of Etruria _formed a league_. If
     they did so more readily and effectually than the Greeks, is not
     the level character of their territory, which made them
     collectively open to attack, and facilitated intercourse, one of
     the obviously probable causes? No doubt the close presence of
     hostile and alien races was a further unifying force which did not
     arise in Greece. Etruria, finally, like Latium, was unified by
     conquest; the question is, Why was not Greece? There is no answer
     save one--that in the pre-Alexandrian period no Greek State had
     acquired the military and administrative skill and resources needed
     to conquer and hold such a divided territory. Certainly the
     conditions conserved the ideal of separateness and non-aggression
     or non-assimilation, so that cities which had easy access to each
     other respected each other's ideal. But here again it was known
     that an attempt at conquest would probably lead to alliances
     between the attacked State and others; and the physical conditions
     prevented any State save Macedonia from becoming overwhelmingly
     strong. To these conditions, then, we always return, not as to sole
     causes, but as to determinants.

(_d_) In Egypt, again, culture was never deeply disseminated, and before
Alexander was hardly at all fecundated by outside contact. In Greece
there was always the great uncultured slave substratum; and the arrest
of freedom, to say nothing of social ignorance, female subjection, and
sexual perversion, ultimately kept vital culture stationary. In Rome,
militarism and the multiplication of the slave class, along with the
deletion of the independent and industrious middle class, made
progressive culture impossible, as surely as it broke down
self-government. In all cases alike, over-population, not being met by
science, either bred poverty or was obviated by crime and vice.

The so-called regeneration of Europe by the barbarian conquest, finally,
was simply the beginning of a long period of corrupted and internecine
barbarism, the old culture remaining latent; and not till after many
centuries did the maturing barbaric civilisation in times of compulsory
peace reach the capacity of being fecundated by the intelligent
assimilation of the old. But after the Renaissance, as before, the
diseases of militarism and class privilege and the political subjection
caused a backthrow and intellectual stagnation, which was assisted by
the commercial decline brought upon Italy; so that in the feudal period,
in one State after another, we have the symptoms of, as it were, senile
"decay" and retrogression.[153] In all cases this is to be set down
proximately to the deficit of new ideas, and in some to excess of
strife, which exhausted spare energy among the leisured class, deepened
the misery of the toilers, and normally prevented the intelligent
intercourse of peoples. It is become a commonplace of historical
philosophy that the Crusades wrought for good inasmuch as they meant
fresh communication between East and West. Yet it may be doubted whether
much more was not done through the quiet contacts of peace between
Saracen and Christian in Western Europe, and by the commerce with the
East which preceded the Crusades,[154] than by the forced intercourse
following on religious war. In any case, the transition from quasi-decay
to progress in Christendom is clearly due to the entrance of new ideas
of many species from many directions into the common stock; Greek
letters, Saracen physics, and new geographical discovery all combining
to generate thought.

The case of Japan, again, compares with both that of ancient Greece and
that of modern Europe. Its separate civilisation, advantageously placed
in an archipelago, drew stimulus early in the historic period from that
of China; and, while long showing the Chinese unprogressiveness in other
respects, partly in virtue of the peculiar burdensomeness of the
Chino-Japanese system of ideograms, it made remarkable progress on the
side of art. The recent rapid industrial development (injurious to the
artistic life) is plainly a result of the European and American
contact; and if only the mechanism of reading and writing be made
manageable on the European lines, and the snare of militarism be
escaped, the Japanese civilisation may develop mentally as much as it is
doing industrially and in military organisation.

It suffices the practical political student, then, to note that progress
is thus always a matter of intelligible causation; and, without
concerning himself about predicting the future or estimating the sum of
possibilities, to take up the tasks of contemporary politics as all
other tasks are taken up by practical men, as a matter of adaptation of
means to ends. The architect and engineer have nothing to do with
calculating as to when the energy of the solar system will be wholly
transmuted. As little has the politician to do with absolute estimates
of the nature of progress. All alike have to do with the study of laws,
forces, and economics.


¤ 3

We may now, then, set forth the all-pervading biological forces or
tendencies of attraction and repulsion in human affairs as the main
primary factors in politics or corporate life, which it is the problem
of human science to control by counteracting or guiding; and we may
without further illustration set down the principal modes in which these
instincts appear. They are, broadly speaking:--

     (_a_) Animal pugnacities and antipathies of States or peoples,
     involving combinations, sanctified from the first by religion, and
     surviving as racial aspirations in subject peoples.

     (_b_) Class divisions, economically produced, resulting in class
     combinations and hostilities within a State, and, in particular,
     popular desire for betterment.

     (_c_) The tendency to despotism as a cure for class oppression or
     anarchy; and the spirit of conquest.

     (_d_) The beneficent lure of commerce, promoting intercourse,
     countered by the commercial jealousies of States.

     (_e_) Designs of rulers, giving rise to popular or aristocratic
     factions--complicated by questions of succession and loyalism.

     (_f_) Religious combinations, antipathies, and ambitions,
     international or sectarian. In more educated communities, ideals of
     government and conduct.

In every one of these modes, be it observed, the instinct of repulsion
correlates with the instinct of attraction. The strifes are the strifes
of combinations, of groups or masses united in themselves by sympathy,
in antipathy to other groups or masses. The _esprit de corps_ arises
alike in the species, the horde, the tribe, the community, the class,
the faction, the nation, the trade or profession, the Church, the sect,
the party. Always men unite to oppose; always they must love to hate,
fraternise to struggle.

     The analogies in physics are obvious, but need not here be dwelt
     upon. There is a risk of losing concrete impressions, which are
     here in view, in a highly generalised statement of cosmic
     analogies. But it may be well to point out that a general view will
     perfectly reconcile the superficially conflicting doctrines of
     recent biologists, as to "progress by struggle" and "progress by
     co-operation." Both statements hold good, the two phases being
     correlatives.

I have said that it is extremely difficult to imagine a state of society
in which there shall be no public operation of any one of these forces.
I am disposed to say it is impossible, but for scientific purposes
prefer to put simply the difficulties of the conception. A cessation of
war is not only easily conceivable, but likely; but a cessation of
strife of aspiration would mean a state of biological equilibrium
throughout the civilised world. Now, pure equilibrium is by general
consent a state only momentarily possible; and the state of dissolution
of unions, were that to follow, would involve strife of opinion at least
up to a certain point. But just as evolution is now visibly towards an
abandonment of brute strife among societies, so may it be reasonably
expected that the strife of ideals and doctrines within societies,
though now perhaps emotionally intense in proportion to the limitation
of brute warfare, will gradually be freed of malevolent passion as
organisms refine further. Passion, in any case, has hitherto been at
once motive-power and hindrance--the omnipresent force, since all ideas
have their correlative emotion. A perception of this has led to some
needless dispute over what is called the "economic theory" of history;
critics insisting that men are ruled by non-economic as well as economic
motives.[155] The solution is perfectly simple. Men are proximately
ruled by their passions or emotions; and the supremacy of the economic
factor consists in its being, for the majority, the most permanent
director or stimulant of feeling. Therefore, the great social
rectification, if it ever come, must needs be economic.

Certainly, on the principle laid down, there is a likelihood that strife
of ideals and doctrines may be for a time intensified by the very
process of social reform, should that go to lessen the stress of the
industrial struggle for existence. It is easy to see that England has in
the past hundred and twenty years escaped the stress of domestic strife
which in France wrought successive revolutions, not so much by any
virtue in its partially democratic constitution as by the fact that on
the one hand a war was begun with France by the English ruling classes
at an early stage of the first revolution, and that on the other hand
the animal energies of the middle and lower classes were on the whole
freer than those of the French to run in the channels of industrial
competition. People peacefully fighting each other daily in trade, not
to speak of sports, were thereby partly safeguarded from carrying the
instincts of attraction and repulsion in politics to the length of
insurrection and civil war. When the strife of trade became congested,
the spirit of political strife, fed by hunger, broke out afresh, to be
again eased off when the country had an exciting foreign war on hand. So
obvious is this that it may be the last card of Conservatism to play off
the war spirit against the reform spirit, as was done with some
temporary success in England by Beaconsfield, and as is latterly being
done by his successors.[156] The climaxing movement of political
rationalism is evidently dependent on the limitation of the field of
industrial growth and the absence of brute warfare. And if, as seems
conceivable, political rationalism attains to a scientific provision for
the well-being of the mass of the people, we shall have attained a
condition in which the forces of attraction and repulsion, no longer
flowing freely in the old social channels, may be expected to dig new
ones or deepen those lately formed. The future channels, generally
speaking, would tend to lie in the regions of political, ethical, and
religious opinion; and the partial disuse of any one of these will tend
to bring about the deepening of the others.

But this is going far ahead; and it is our business rather to make
clear, with the help of an analysis of analogous types of civilisation,
what has happened in the modern past of our country. The simple general
laws under notice are universal, and will be found to apply in all
stages of history, though the interpretation of many phases of life by
their means may be a somewhat complex matter.

For instance, the life of China[157] (above discussed) and that of India
may at first sight seem to give little colour to the assumption of a
constant play of social attraction and repulsion. The "unprogressiveness
of Asia" is dwelt on alike by many who know Asia and many who do not.
But this relative unprogressiveness is to be explained, like European
progress, in terms of the conditions. China is simply a case of
comparative culture-stability and culture-isolation. The capital
condition of progress in civilisation has always been, as aforesaid, the
contact of divergent races whose independent culture-elements, though
different, are not greatly different in grade and prestige. Now, the
outside contacts of China, down till the eighteenth century, had been
either with races which had few elements of civilisation to give her,
like the Mongols, or with a civilisation little different from or less
vigorous than her own, like that of India. Even these contacts counted
for much, and Chinese history has been full of political convulsions,
despite--or in keeping with--the comparative stagnation of Chinese
culture. (On this see Peschel, _Races of Men_, Eng. tr. pp. 361-74. Cp.
Huc, _Chinese Empire_, Eng. tr. ed. 1859, p. xvii; Walckenaer, _Essai
sur l'histoire de l'espce humaine_, 1798, pp. 175, 176; and Maine,
_Early History of Institutions_, pp. 226, 227). The very pigtail which
for Europe is the symbol of Chinese civilisation is only two hundred
years old, having come in with the Mantchoo dynasty; and the policy of
systematically excluding foreigners dates from the same period (Huc, p.
236). "No one," writes Professor Flint, "who has felt interest enough in
that singular nation to study the researches and translations of
Remusat, Pauthier, Julien, Legge, Plath, Faber, Eitel, and others, will
hesitate to dismiss as erroneous the commonplace that it has been an
unprogressive nation" (_History of the Philosophy of History_, vol. i,
1893, p. 88).

China was in fact progressive while the variety of stocks scattered over
her vast area reacted on each other in virtue of variety of government
and way of life:[158] it was when they were reduced under one imperial
government that unity of state-system, coupled with the exclusion of
foreign contacts, imposed stagnation. But the stagnation was real, and
other factors contributed to its continuance. The fecundity of the soil
has always maintained a redundant and therefore a poor and ignorant
population--a condition which we have described as fatal to progress in
culture if not counteracted, and which further favours the utter
subjection of women and the consequent arrest of half the sources of
variation. Mencius, speaking to the rulers of his day (3rd c. B.C.),
declared with simple profundity that "They are only men of education
who, without a certain livelihood, are able to maintain a fixed heart.
As to the people, if they have not a certain livelihood it follows that
they will not have a fixed heart. And if they have not a fixed heart
there is nothing they will not do in the way of self-abandonment, of
moral deflection, of depravity, and of wild license" (Legge, _Life and
Works of Mencius_, 1875, p. 49). That lesson the rulers of China could
not learn, any more than their European congeners.

We cannot, therefore, accede to Professor Flint's further remark that
"The development and filiation of thought is scarcely less traceable in
the history and literature of China than of Greece"--that is, if it be
meant that Chinese history down till our own day may be so compared with
the history of pagan Greece. The forces of fixation in China have been
too strong to admit of this. The same factors have been at work in
India, where, further, successive conquests, down till our own, had
results very similar to those of the barbarian conquest of the Roman
Empire. Yet at length, next door to China, in Japan, there has rapidly
taken place a national transformation that is not to be paralleled in
the world's history; and in India the Congress movement has developed in
a way that twenty years ago was thought impossible.[159] And while these
things are actually happening before the world's eyes, certain
Englishmen vociferate more loudly than ever the formula of the
"unchangeableness of Asia." A saner, though still a speculative view, is
put forth by Mr. C.H. Pearson in his work on _National Character_. It
was anticipated by--among others--M. Philarte Chasles. See his
_L'Angleterre politique_, Ždit. 1878, pp. 250, 251. And Walckenaer, over
a hundred years ago (_Essai_ cited, p. 368), predicted the future
civilisation of the vast plains of Tartary.
