V

THE PROTESTANT THEORY OF PERSECUTION[193]


The manner in which Religion influences State policy is more easily
ascertained in the case of Protestantism than in that of the Catholic
Church: for whilst the expression of Catholic doctrines is authoritative
and unvarying, the great social problems did not all arise at once, and
have at various times received different solutions. The reformers failed
to construct a complete and harmonious code of doctrine; but they were
compelled to supplement the new theology by a body of new rules for the
guidance of their followers in those innumerable questions with regard
to which the practice of the Church had grown out of the experience of
ages. And although the dogmatic system of Protestantism was not
completed in their time, yet the Protestant spirit animated them in
greater purity and force than it did any later generation. Now, when a
religion is applied to the social and political sphere, its general
spirit must be considered, rather than its particular precepts. So that
in studying the points of this application in the case of Protestantism,
we may consult the writings of the reformers with greater confidence
than we could do for an exposition of Protestant theology; and accept
them as a greater authority, because they agree more entirely among
themselves. We can be more sure that we have the true Protestant opinion
in a political or social question on which all the reformers are agreed,
than in a theological question on which they differ; for the concurrent
opinion must be founded on an element common to all, and therefore
essential. If it should further appear that this opinion was injurious
to their actual interests, and maintained at a sacrifice to themselves,
we should then have an additional security for its necessary connection
with their fundamental views.

The most important example of this law is the Protestant theory of
toleration. The views of the reformers on religious liberty are not
fragmentary, accidental opinions, unconnected with their doctrines, or
suggested by the circumstances amidst which they lived; but the product
of their theological system, and of their ideas of political and
ecclesiastical government. Civil and religious liberty are so commonly
associated in people's mouths, and are so rare in fact, that their
definition is evidently as little understood as the principle of their
connection. The point at which they unite, the common root from which
they derive their sustenance, is the right of self-government. The
modern theory, which has swept away every authority except that of the
State, and has made the sovereign power irresistible by multiplying
those who share it, is the enemy of that common freedom in which
religious freedom is included. It condemns, as a State within the State,
every inner group and community, class or corporation, administering its
own affairs; and, by proclaiming the abolition of privileges, it
emancipates the subjects of every such authority in order to transfer
them exclusively to its own. It recognises liberty only in the
individual, because it is only in the individual that liberty can be
separated from authority, and the right of conditional obedience
deprived of the security of a limited command. Under its sway,
therefore, every man may profess his own religion more or less freely;
but his religion is not free to administer its own laws. In other words,
religious profession is free, but Church government is controlled. And
where ecclesiastical authority is restricted, religious liberty is
virtually denied.

For religious liberty is not the negative right of being without any
particular religion, just as self-government is not anarchy. It is the
right of religious communities to the practice of their own duties, the
enjoyment of their own constitution, and the protection of the law,
which equally secures to all the possession of their own independence.
Far from implying a general toleration, it is best secured by a limited
one. In an indifferent State, that is, in a State without any definite
religious character (if such a thing is conceivable), no ecclesiastical
authority could exist. A hierarchical organisation would not be
tolerated by the sects that have none, or by the enemies of all definite
religion; for it would be in contradiction to the prevailing theory of
atomic freedom. Nor can a religion be free when it is alone, unless it
makes the State subject to it. For governments restrict the liberty of
the favoured Church, by way of remunerating themselves for their service
in preserving her unity. The most violent and prolonged conflicts for
religious freedom occurred in the Middle Ages between a Church which was
not threatened by rivals and States which were most attentive to
preserve her exclusive predominance. Frederic II., the most tyrannical
oppressor of the Church among the German emperors, was the author of
those sanguinary laws against heresy which prevailed so long in many
parts of Europe. The Inquisition, which upheld the religious unity of
the Spanish nation, imposed the severest restrictions on the Spanish
Church; and in England conformity has been most rigorously exacted by
those sovereigns who have most completely tyrannised over the
Established Church. Religious liberty, therefore, is possible only where
the co-existence of different religions is admitted, with an equal right
to govern themselves according to their own several principles.
Tolerance of error is requisite for freedom; but freedom will be most
complete where there is no actual diversity to be resisted, and no
theoretical unity to be maintained, but where unity exists as the
triumph of truth, not of force, through the victory of the Church, not
through the enactment of the State.

This freedom is attainable only in communities where rights are sacred,
and where law is supreme. If the first duty is held to be obedience to
authority and the preservation of order, as in the case of aristocracies
and monarchies of the patriarchal type, there is no safety for the
liberties either of individuals or of religion. Where the highest
consideration is the public good and the popular will, as in
democracies, and in constitutional monarchies after the French pattern,
majority takes the place of authority; an irresistible power is
substituted for an idolatrous principle, and all private rights are
equally insecure. The true theory of freedom excludes all absolute power
and arbitrary action, and requires that a tyrannical or revolutionary
government shall be coerced by the people; but it teaches that
insurrection is criminal, except as a corrective of revolution and
tyranny. In order to understand the views of the Protestant reformers on
toleration, they must be considered with reference to these points.

While the Reformation was an act of individual resistance and not a
system, and when the secular Powers were engaged in supporting the
authority of the Church, the authors of the movement were compelled to
claim impunity for their opinions, and they held language regarding the
right of governments to interfere with religious belief which resembles
that of friends of toleration. Every religious party, however exclusive
or servile its theory may be, if it is in contradiction with a system
generally accepted and protected by law, must necessarily, at its first
appearance, assume the protection of the idea that the conscience is
free.[194] Before a new authority can be set up in the place of one that
exists, there is an interval when the right of dissent must be
proclaimed. At the beginning of Luther's contest with the Holy See
there was no rival authority for him to appeal to. No ecclesiastical
organism existed, the civil power was not on his side, and not even a
definite system had yet been evolved by controversy out of his original
doctrine of justification. His first efforts were acts of hostility, his
exhortations were entirely aggressive, and his appeal was to the masses.
When the prohibition of his New Testament confirmed him in the belief
that no favour was to be expected from the princes, he published his
book on the Civil Power, which he judged superior to everything that had
been written on government since the days of the Apostles, and in which
he asserts that authority is given to the State only against the wicked,
and that it cannot coerce the godly. "Princes," he says, "are not to be
obeyed when they command submission to superstitious errors, but their
aid is not to be invoked in support of the Word of God."[195] Heretics
must be converted by the Scriptures, and not by fire, otherwise the
hangman would be the greatest doctor.[196] At the time when this was
written Luther was expecting the bull of excommunication and the ban of
the empire, and for several years it appeared doubtful whether he would
escape the treatment he condemned. He lived in constant fear of
assassination, and his friends amused themselves with his terrors. At
one time he believed that a Jew had been hired by the Polish bishops to
despatch him; that an invisible physician was on his way to Wittenberg
to murder him; that the pulpit from which he preached was impregnated
with a subtle poison.[197] These alarms dictated his language during
those early years. It was not the true expression of his views, which he
was not yet strong enough openly to put forth.[198]

The Zwinglian schism, the rise of the Anabaptists, and the Peasants' War
altered the aspect of affairs. Luther recognised in them the fruits of
his theory of the right of private judgment and of dissent,[199] and the
moment had arrived to secure his Church against the application of the
same dissolving principles which had served him to break off from his
allegiance to Rome.[200] The excesses of the social war threatened to
deprive the movement of the sympathy of the higher classes, especially
of the governments; and with the defeat of the peasants the popular
phase of the Reformation came to an end on the Continent. "The devil,"
Luther said, "having failed to put him down by the help of the Pope, was
seeking his destruction through the preachers of treason and
blood."[201] He instantly turned from the people to the princes;[202]
impressed on his party that character of political dependence, and that
habit of passive obedience to the State, which it has ever since
retained, and gave it a stability it could never otherwise have
acquired. In thus taking refuge in the arms of the civil power,
purchasing the safety of his doctrine by the sacrifice of its freedom,
and conferring on the State, together with the right of control, the
duty of imposing it at the point of the sword, Luther in reality
reverted to his original teaching.[203] The notion of liberty, whether
civil or religious, was hateful to his despotic nature, and contrary to
his interpretation of Scripture. As early as 1519 he had said that even
the Turk was to be reverenced as an authority.[204] The demoralising
servitude and lawless oppression which the peasants endured, gave them,
in his eyes, no right to relief; and when they rushed to arms, invoking
his name as their deliverer, he exhorted the nobles to take a merciless
revenge.[205] Their crime was, that they were animated by the sectarian
spirit, which it was the most important interest of Luther to suppress.

The Protestant authorities throughout Southern Germany were perplexed by
their victory over the Anabaptists. It was not easy to show that their
political tenets were revolutionary, and the only subversive portion of
their doctrine was that they held, with the Catholics, that the State is
not responsible for religion.[206] They were punished, therefore,
because they taught that no man ought to suffer for his faith. At
Nuremberg the magistrates did not know how to proceed against them. They
seemed no worse than the Catholics, whom there was no question at that
time of exterminating. The celebrated Osiander deemed these scruples
inconsistent. The Papists, he said, ought also to be suppressed; and so
long as this was not done, it was impossible to proceed to extremities
against the Anabaptists, who were no worse than they. Luther also was
consulted, and he decided that they ought not to be punished unless they
refused to conform at the command of the Government.[207] The Margrave
of Brandenburg was also advised by the divines that a heretic who could
not be converted out of Scripture might be condemned; but that in his
sentence nothing should be said about heresy, but only about sedition
and murderous intent, though he should be guiltless of these.[208] With
the aid of this artifice great numbers were put to death.

Luther's proud and ardent spirit despised such pretences. He had cast
off all reserve, and spoke his mind openly on the rights and duties of
the State towards the Church and the people. His first step was to
proclaim it the office of the civil power to prevent abominations.[209]
He provided no security that, in discharging this duty, the sovereign
should be guided by the advice of orthodox divines;[210] but he held the
duty itself to be imperative. In obedience to the fundamental principle,
that the Bible is the sole guide in all things, he defined the office
and justified it by scriptural precedents. The Mosaic code, he argued,
awarded to false prophets the punishment of death, and the majesty of
God is not to be less deeply reverenced or less rigorously vindicated
under the New Testament than under the Old; in a more perfect revelation
the obligation is stronger. Those who will not hear the Church must be
excluded from the communion; but the civil power is to intervene when
the ecclesiastical excommunication has been pronounced, and men must be
compelled to come in. For, according to the more accurate definition of
the Church which is given in the Confession of Schmalkald, and in the
Apology of the Confession of Augsburg, excommunication involves
damnation. There is no salvation to be hoped for out of the Church, and
the test of orthodoxy against the Pope, the devil, and all the world, is
the dogma of justification by faith.[211]

The defence of religion became, on this theory, not only the duty of the
civil power, but the object of its institution. Its business was solely
the coercion of those who were out of the Church. The faithful could not
be the objects of its action; they did of their own accord more than any
laws required. "A good tree," says Luther, "brings forth good fruit by
nature, without compulsion; is it not madness to prescribe laws to an
apple-tree that it shall bear apples and not thorns?"[212] This view
naturally proceeded from the axiom of the certainty of the salvation of
all who believe in the Confession of Augsburg.[213] It is the most
important element in Luther's political system, because, while it made
all Protestant governments despotic, it led to the rejection of the
authority of Catholic governments. This is the point where Protestant
and Catholic intolerance meet. If the State were instituted to promote
the faith, no obedience could be due to a State of a different faith.
Protestants could not conscientiously be faithful subjects of Catholic
Powers, and they could not therefore be tolerated. Misbelievers would
have no rights under an orthodox State, and a misbelieving prince would
have no authority over orthodox subjects. The more, therefore, Luther
expounded the guilt of resistance and the Divine sanction of authority,
the more subversive his influence became in Catholic countries. His
system was alike revolutionary, whether he defied the Catholic powers or
promoted a Protestant tyranny. He had no notion of political right. He
found no authority for such a claim in the New Testament, and he held
that righteousness does not need to exhibit itself in works.

It was the same helpless dependence on the letter of Scripture which led
the reformers to consequences more subversive of Christian morality than
their views on questions of polity. When Carlstadt cited the Mosaic law
in defence of polygamy, Luther was indignant. If the Mosaic law is to
govern everything, he said, we should be compelled to adopt
circumcision.[214] Nevertheless, as there is no prohibition of polygamy
in the New Testament, the reformers were unable to condemn it. They did
not forbid it as a matter of Divine law, and referred it entirely to the
decision of the civil legislator.[215] This, accordingly was the view
which guided Luther and Melanchthon in treating the problem, the
ultimate solution of which was the separation of England from the
Church.[216] When the Landgrave Philip afterwards appealed to this
opinion, and to the earlier commentaries of Luther, the reformers were
compelled to approve his having two wives. Melanchthon was a witness at
the wedding of the second, and the only reservation was a request that
the matter should not be allowed to get abroad.[217] It was the same
portion of Luther's theology, and the same opposition to the spirit of
the Church in the treatment of Scripture, that induced him to believe in
astrology and to ridicule the Copernican system.[218]

His view of the authority of Scripture and his theory of justification
both precluded him from appreciating freedom. "Christian freedom," he
said, "consists in the belief that we require no works to attain piety
and salvation."[219] Thus he became the inventor of the theory of
passive obedience, according to which no motives or provocation can
justify a revolt; and the party against whom the revolt is directed,
whatever its guilt may be, is to be preferred to the party revolting,
however just its cause.[220] In 1530 he therefore declared that the
German princes had no right to resist the Emperor in defence of their
religion. "It was the duty of a Christian," he said, "to suffer wrong,
and no breach of oath or of duty could deprive the Emperor of his right
to the unconditional obedience of his subjects."[221] Even the empire
seemed to him a despotism, from his scriptural belief that it was a
continuation of the last of the four monarchies.[222] He preferred
submission, in the hope of seeing a future Protestant Emperor, to a
resistance which might have dismembered the empire if it had succeeded,
and in which failure would have been fatal to the Protestants; and he
was always afraid to draw the logical consequences of his theory of the
duty of Protestants towards Catholic sovereigns. In consequence of this
fact, Ranke affirms that the great reformer was also one of the greatest
conservatives that ever lived; and his biographer, Jürgens, makes the
more discriminating remark that history knows of no man who was at once
so great an insurgent and so great an upholder of order as he.[223]
Neither of these writers understood that the same principle lies at the
root both of revolution and of passive obedience, and that the
difference is only in the temper of the person who applies it, and in
the outward circumstances.

Luther's theory is apparently in opposition to Protestant interests, for
it entitles Catholicism to the protection of Catholic Powers. He
disguised from himself this inconsistency, and reconciled theory with
expediency by the calculation that the immense advantages which his
system offered to the princes would induce them all to adopt it. For,
besides the consolatory doctrine of justification,--"a doctrine
original, specious, persuasive, powerful against Rome, and wonderfully
adapted, as if prophetically, to the genius of the times which were to
follow,"[224]--he bribed the princes with the wealth of the Church,
independence of ecclesiastical authority, facilities for polygamy, and
absolute power. He told the peasants not to take arms against the Church
unless they could persuade the Government to give the order; but
thinking it probable, in 1522, that the Catholic clergy would, in spite
of his advice, be exterminated by the fury of the people, he urged the
Government to suppress them, because what was done by the constituted
authority could not be wrong.[225] Persuaded that the sovereign power
would be on his side, he allowed no limits to its extent. It is absurd,
he says, to imagine that, even with the best intentions, kings can avoid
committing occasional injustice; they stand, therefore, particularly in
need--not of safeguards against the abuse of power, but--of the
forgiveness of sins.[226] The power thus concentrated in the hands of
the rulers for the guardianship of the faith, he wished to be used with
the utmost severity against unregenerate men, in whom there was neither
moral virtue nor civil rights, and from whom no good could come until
they were converted. He therefore required that all crimes should be
most cruelly punished and that the secular arm should be employed to
convert where it did not destroy. The idea of mercy tempering justice he
denounced as a Popish superstition.[227]

The chief object of the severity thus recommended was, of course,
efficaciously to promote the end for which Government itself was held to
be instituted. The clergy had authority over the conscience, but it was
thought necessary that they should be supported by the State with the
absolute penalties of outlawry, in order that error might be
exterminated, although it was impossible to banish sin.[228] No
Government, it was maintained, could tolerate heresy without being
responsible for the souls that were seduced by it;[229] and as Ezechiel
destroyed the brazen serpent to prevent idolatry, the mass must be
suppressed, for the mass was the worst kind of idolatry.[230] In 1530,
when it was proposed to leave the matters in dispute to the decision of
the future Council, Luther declared that the mass and monastic life
could not be tolerated in the meantime, because it was unlawful to
connive at error.[231] "It will lie heavy on your conscience," he writes
to the Duke of Saxony, "if you tolerate the Catholic worship; for no
secular prince can permit his subjects to be divided by the preaching
of opposite doctrines. The Catholics have no right to complain, for they
do not prove the truth of their doctrine from Scripture, and therefore
do not conscientiously believe it."[232] He would tolerate them only if
they acknowledged themselves, like the Jews, enemies of Christ and of
the Emperor, and consented to exist as outcasts of society.[233]
"Heretics," he said, "are not to be disputed with, but to be condemned
unheard, and whilst they perish by fire, the faithful ought to pursue
the evil to its source, and bathe their hands in the blood of the
Catholic bishops, and of the Pope, who is a devil in disguise."[234]

The persecuting principles which were involved in Luther's system, but
which he cared neither to develop, to apply, nor to defend, were formed
into a definite theory by the colder genius of Melanchthon. Destitute of
Luther's confidence in his own strength, and in the infallible success
of his doctrine, he clung more eagerly to the hope of achieving victory
by the use of physical force. Like his master he too hesitated at first,
and opposed the use of severe measures against the Zwickau prophets; but
when he saw the development of that early germ of dissent, and the
gradual dissolution of Lutheran unity, he repented of his ill-timed
clemency.[235] He was not deterred from asserting the duty of
persecution by the risk of putting arms into the hands of the enemies of
the Reformation. He acknowledged the danger, but he denied the right.
Catholic powers, he deemed, might justly persecute, but they could only
persecute error. They must apply the same criterion which the Lutherans
applied, and then they were justified in persecuting those whom the
Lutherans also proscribed. For the civil power had no right to proscribe
a religion in order to save itself from the dangers of a distracted and
divided population. The judge of the fact and of the danger must be, not
the magistrate, but the clergy.[236] The crime lay, not in dissent, but
in error. Here, therefore, Melanchthon repudiated the theory and
practice of the Catholics, whose aid he invoked; for all the intolerance
in the Catholic times was founded on the combination of two ideas--the
criminality of apostasy, and the inability of the State to maintain its
authority where the moral sense of a part of the community was in
opposition to it. The reformers, therefore, approved the Catholic
practice of intolerance, and even encouraged it, although their own
principles of persecution were destitute not only of connection, but
even of analogy, with it. By simply accepting the inheritance of the
mediæval theory of the religious unity of the empire, they would have
been its victims. By asserting that persecution was justifiable only
against error, that is, only when purely religious, they set up a shield
for themselves, and a sword against those sects for whose destruction
they were more eager than the Catholics. Whether we refer the origin of
Protestant intolerance to the doctrines or to the interests of the
Reformation, it appears totally unconnected with the tradition of
Catholic ages, or the atmosphere of Catholicism. All severities
exercised by Catholics before that time had a practical motive; but
Protestant persecution was based on a purely speculative foundation, and
was due partly to the influence of Scripture examples, partly to the
supposed interests of the Protestant party. It never admitted the
exclusion of dissent to be a political right of the State, but
maintained the suppression of error to be its political duty. To say,
therefore, that the Protestants learnt persecution from the Catholics,
is as false as to say that they used it by way of revenge. For they
founded it on very different and contradictory grounds, and they
admitted the right of the Catholics to persecute even the Protestant
sects.

Melanchthon taught that the sects ought to be put down by the sword, and
that any individual who started new opinions ought to be punished with
death.[237] He carefully laid down that these severities were requisite,
not in consideration of the danger to the State, nor of immoral
teaching, nor even of such differences as would weaken the authority or
arrest the action of the ecclesiastical organisation, but simply on
account of a difference, however slight, in the theologumena of
Protestantism.[238] Thamer, who held the possibility of salvation among
the heathen; Schwenkfeld, who taught that not the written Word, but the
internal illumination of grace in the soul was the channel of God's
influence on man; the Zwinglians, with their error on the Eucharist, all
these met with no more favour than the fanatical Anabaptists.[239] The
State was held bound to vindicate the first table of the law with the
same severity as those commandments on which civil society depends for
its existence. The government of the Church being administered by the
civil magistrates, it was their office also to enforce the ordinances of
religion; and the same power whose voice proclaimed religious orthodoxy
and law held in its hand the sword by which they were enforced. No
religious authority existed except through the civil power.[240] The
Church was merged in the State; but the laws of the State, in return,
were identified with the commandments of religion.[241]

In accordance with these principles, the condemnation of Servetus by a
civil tribunal, which had no authority over him, and no jurisdiction
over his crime--the most aggressive and revolutionary act, therefore,
that is conceivable in the casuistry of persecution--was highly approved
by Melanchthon. He declared it a most useful example for all future
ages, and could not understand that there should be any who did not
regard it in the same favourable light.[242] It is true that Servetus,
by denying the divinity of Christ, was open to the charge of blasphemy
in a stricter sense than that in which the reformers generally applied
it. But this was not the case with the Catholics. They did not
represent, like the sects, an element of dissolution in Protestantism,
and the bulk of their doctrine was admitted by the reformers. They were
not in revolt against existing authority; they required no special
innovations for their protection; they demanded only that the change of
religion should not be compulsory. Yet Melanchthon held that they too
were to be proscribed, because their worship was idolatrous.[243] In
doing this he adopted the principle of aggressive intolerance, which was
at that time new to the Christian world; and which the Popes and
Councils of the Catholic Church had condemned when the zeal of laymen
had gone beyond the lawful measure. In the Middle Ages there had been
persecution far more sanguinary than any that has been inflicted by
Protestants. Various motives had occasioned it and various arguments had
been used in its defence. But the principle on which the Protestants
oppressed the Catholics was new. The Catholics had never admitted the
theory of absolute toleration, as it was defined at first by Luther, and
afterwards by some of the sects. In principle, their tolerance differed
from that of the Protestants as widely as their intolerance. They had
exterminated sects which, like the Albigenses, threatened to overturn
the fabric of Christian society. They had proscribed different
religions where the State was founded on religious unity, and where this
unity formed an integral part of its laws and administration. They had
gone one step further, and punished those whom the Church condemned as
apostates; thereby vindicating, not, as in the first case, the moral
basis of society, nor, as in the second, the religious foundation of the
State, but the authority of the Church and the purity of her doctrine,
on which they relied as the pillar and bulwark of the social and
political order. Where a portion of the inhabitants of any country
preferred a different creed, Jew, Mohammedan, heathen, or schismatic,
they had been generally tolerated, with enjoyment of property and
personal freedom, but not with that of political power or autonomy. But
political freedom had been denied them because they did not admit the
common ideas of duty which were its basis. This position, however, was
not tenable, and was the source of great disorders. The Protestants, in
like manner, could give reasons for several kinds of persecution. They
could bring the Socinians under the category of blasphemers; and
blasphemy, like the ridicule of sacred things, destroys reverence and
awe, and tends to the destruction of society. The Anabaptists, they
might argue, were revolutionary fanatics, whose doctrines were
subversive of the civil order; and the dogmatic sects threatened the
ruin of ecclesiastical unity within the Protestant community itself. But
by placing the necessity of intolerance on the simple ground of
religious error, and in directing it against the Church which they
themselves had abandoned, they introduced a purely subjective test, and
a purely revolutionary system. It is on this account that the _tu
quoque_, or retaliatory argument, is inadmissible between Catholics and
Protestants. Catholic intolerance is handed down from an age when unity
subsisted, and when its preservation, being essential for that of
society, became a necessity of State as well as a result of
circumstances. Protestant intolerance, on the contrary was the peculiar
fruit of a dogmatic system in contradiction with the facts and
principles on which the intolerance actually existing among Catholics
was founded. Spanish intolerance has been infinitely more sanguinary
than Swedish; but in Spain, independently of the interests of religion,
there were strong political and social reasons to justify persecution
without seeking any theory to prop it up; whilst in Sweden all those
practical considerations have either been wanting, or have been opposed
to persecution, which has consequently had no justification except the
theory of the Reformation. The only instance in which the Protestant
theory has been adopted by Catholics is the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes.

Towards the end of his life, Melanchthon, having ceased to be a strict
Lutheran, receded somewhat from his former uncompromising position, and
was adverse to a strict scrutiny into minor theological differences. He
drew a distinction between errors that required punishment and
variations that were not of practical importance.[244] The English
Calvinists who took refuge in Germany in the reign of Mary Tudor were
ungraciously received by those who were stricter Lutherans than
Melanchthon. He was consulted concerning the course to be adopted
towards the refugees, and he recommended toleration. But both at Wesel
and at Frankfort his advice was, to his great disgust, overruled.[245]

The severities of the Protestants were chiefly provoked by the
Anabaptists, who denied the lawfulness of civil government, and strove
to realise the kingdom of God on earth by absorbing the State in the
Church.[246] None protested more loudly than they against the Lutheran
intolerance, or suffered from it more severely. But while denying the
spiritual authority of the State, they claimed for their religious
community a still more absolute right of punishing error by death.
Though they sacrificed government to religion, the effect was the same
as that of absorbing the Church in the State. In 1524 Münzer published a
sermon, in which he besought the Lutheran princes to extirpate
Catholicism. "Have no remorse," he says; "for He to whom all power is
given in heaven and on earth means to govern alone."[247] He demanded
the punishment of all heretics, the destruction of all who were not of
his faith, and the institution of religious unity. "Do not pretend," he
says, "that the power of God will accomplish it without the use of your
sword, or it will grow rusty in the scabbard. The tree that bringeth not
forth good fruit must be cut down and cast into the fire." And
elsewhere, "the ungodly have no right to live, except so far as the
elect choose to grant it them."[248] When the Anabaptists were supreme
at Münster, they exhibited the same intolerance. At seven in the morning
of Friday, 27th February 1534, they ran through the streets crying,
"Away with the ungodly!" Breaking into the houses of those who refused
their baptism, they drove the men out of the town, and forcibly
rebaptized the women who remained behind.[249] Whilst, therefore, the
Anabaptists were punished for questioning the authority of the
Lutherans in religious matters, they practically justified their
persecution by their own intolerant doctrines. In fact, they carried the
Protestant principles of persecution to an extreme. For whereas the
Lutherans regarded the defence of truth and punishment of error as
being, in part, the object of the institution of civil government, they
recognised it as an advantage by which the State was rewarded for its
pains; but the Anabaptists repudiated the political element altogether,
and held that error should be exterminated solely for the sake of truth,
and at the expense of all existing States.

Bucer, whose position in the history of the Reformation is so peculiar,
and who differed in important points from the Saxon leaders, agreed with
them on the necessity of persecuting. He was so anxious for the success
of Protestantism, that he was ready to sacrifice and renounce important
doctrines, in order to save the appearance of unity;[250] but those
opinions in which he took so little dogmatic interest, he was resolved
to defend by force. He was very much dissatisfied with the reluctance of
the Senate of Strasburg to adopt severe measures against the Catholics.
His colleague Capito was singularly tolerant; for the feeling of the
inhabitants was not decidedly in favour of the change.[251] But Bucer,
his biographer tells us, was, in spite of his inclination to mediate,
not friendly to this temporising system; partly because he had an
organising intellect, which relied greatly on practical discipline to
preserve what had been conquered, and on restriction of liberty to be
the most certain security for its preservation; partly because he had a
deep insight into the nature of various religious tendencies, and was
justly alarmed at their consequences for Church and State.[252] This
point in the character of Bucer provoked a powerful resistance to his
system of ecclesiastical discipline, for it was feared that he would
give to the clergy a tyrannical power.[253] It is true that the
demoralisation which ensued on the destruction of the old ecclesiastical
authority rendered a strict attention on the part of the State to the
affairs of religion highly necessary.[254] The private and confidential
communications of the German reformers give a more hideous picture of
the moral condition of the generation which followed the Reformation
than they draw in their published writings of that which preceded it. It
is on this account that Bucer so strongly insisted on the necessity of
the interference of the civil power in support of the discipline of the
Church.

The Swiss reformers, between whom and the Saxons Bucer forms a
connecting link, differ from them in one respect, which greatly
influenced their notions of government. Luther lived under a monarchy
which was almost absolute, and in which the common people, who were of
Slavonic origin, were in the position of the most abject servitude; but
the divines of Zürich and Bern were republicans. They did not therefore
entertain his exalted views as to the irresistible might of the State;
and instead of requiring as absolute a theory of the indefectibility of
the civil power as he did, they were satisfied with obtaining a
preponderating influence for themselves. Where the power was in hands
less favourable to their cause, they had less inducement to exaggerate
its rights.

Zwingli abolishes both the distinction between Church and State and the
notion of ecclesiastical authority. In his system the civil rulers
possess the spiritual functions; and, as their foremost duty is the
preservation and promotion of the true religion, it is their business to
preach. As magistrates are too much occupied with other things, they
must delegate the ministry of the word to preachers, for whose orthodoxy
they have to provide. They are bound to establish uniformity of
doctrine, and to defend it against Papists and heretics. This is not
only their right, but their duty; and not only their duty, but the
condition on which they retain office.[255] Rulers who do not act in
accordance with it are to be dismissed. Thus Zwingli combined
persecution and revolution in the same doctrine. But he was not a
fanatical persecutor, and his severity was directed less against the
Catholics than against the Anabaptists,[256] whose prohibition of all
civil offices was more subversive of order in a republic than in a
monarchy. Even, however, in the case of the Anabaptists the special
provocation was--not the peril to the State, nor the scandal of their
errors, but--the schism which weakened the Church.[257] The punishment
of heresy for the glory of God was almost inconsistent with the theory
that there is no ecclesiastical power. It was not so much provoked in
Zürich as elsewhere, because in a small republican community, where the
governing body was supreme over both civil and religious affairs,
religious unity was a matter of course. The practical necessity of
maintaining unity put out of sight the speculative question of the guilt
and penalty of error.

Soon after Zwingli's death, Leo Judæ called for severer measures against
the Catholics, expressly stating, however, that they did not deserve
death. "Excommunication," he said, "was too light a punishment to be
inflicted by the State which wields the sword, and the faults in
question were not great enough to involve the danger of death."[258]
Afterwards he fell into doubts as to the propriety of severe measures
against dissenters, but his friends Bullinger and Capito succeeded in
removing his scruples, and in obtaining his acquiescence in that
intolerance, which was, says his biographer, a question of life and
death for the Protestant Church.[259] Bullinger took, like Zwingli, a
more practical view of the question than was common in Germany. He
thought it safer strictly to exclude religious differences than to put
them down with fire and sword; "for in this case," he says, "the victims
compare themselves to the early martyrs, and make their punishment a
weapon of defence."[260] He did not, however, forbid capital punishment
in cases of heresy. In the year 1535 he drew up an opinion on the
treatment of religious error, which is written in a tone of great
moderation. In this document he says "that all sects which introduce
division into the Church must be put down, and not only such as, like
the Anabaptists, threaten to subvert society, for the destruction of
order and unity often begins in an apparently harmless or imperceptible
way. The culprit should be examined with gentleness. If his disposition
is good he will not refuse instruction; if not, still patience must be
shown until there is no hope of converting him. Then he must be treated
like other malefactors, and handed over to the torturer and the
executioner."[261] After this time there were no executions for religion
in Zürich, and the number, even in the lifetime of Zwingli, was less
considerable than in many other places. But it was still understood that
confirmed heretics would be put to death. In 1546, in answer to the
Pope's invitation to the Council of Trent, Bullinger indignantly
repudiates the insinuation that the Protestant cantons were heretical,
"for, by the grace of God, we have always punished the vices of heresy
and sodomy with fire, and have looked upon them, and still look upon
them, with horror."[262] This accusation of heresy inflamed the zeal of
the reformers against heretics, in order to prove to the Catholics that
they had no sympathy with them. On these grounds Bullinger recommended
the execution of Servetus. "If the high Council inflicts on him the fate
due to a worthless blasphemer, all the world will see that the people of
Geneva hate blasphemers, and that they punish with the sword of justice
heretics who are obstinate in their heresy.... Strict fidelity and
vigilance are needed, because our churches are in ill repute abroad, as
if we were heretics and friends of heresy. Now God's holy providence has
furnished an opportunity of clearing ourselves of this evil
suspicion."[263] After the event he advised Calvin to justify it, as
there were some who were taken aback. "Everywhere," he says, "there are
excellent men who are convinced that godless and blaspheming men ought
not only to be rebuked and imprisoned, but also to be put to death....
How Servetus could have been spared I cannot see."[264]

The position of OEcolampadius in reference to these questions was
altogether singular and exceptional. He dreaded the absorption of the
ecclesiastical functions by the State, and sought to avoid it by the
introduction of a council of twelve elders, partly magistrates, partly
clergy, to direct ecclesiastical affairs. "Many things," he said, "are
punished by the secular power less severely than the dignity of the
Church demands. On the other hand, it punishes the repentant, to whom
the Church shows mercy. Either it blunts the edge of its sword by not
punishing the guilty, or it brings some hatred on the Gospel by
severity."[265] But the people of Basel were deaf to the arguments of
the reformer, and here, as elsewhere, the civil power usurped the office
of the Church. In harmony with this jealousy of political interference,
OEcolampadius was very merciful to the Anabaptists. "Severe penalties,"
he said, "were likely to aggravate the evil; forgiveness would hasten
the cure."[266] A few months later, however, he regretted this leniency.
"We perceive," he writes to a friend, "that we have sometimes shown too
much indulgence; but this is better than to proceed tyrannically, or to
surrender the keys of the Church."[267] Whilst, on the other hand, he
rejoiced at the expulsion of the Catholics, he ingeniously justified the
practice of the Catholic persecutors. "In the early ages of the Church,
when the divinity of Christ manifested itself to the world by miracles,
God incited the Apostles to treat the ungodly with severity. When the
miracles ceased, and the faith was universally adopted, He gained the
hearts of princes and rulers, so that they undertook to protect with the
sword the gentleness and patience of the Church. They rigorously
resisted, in fulfilment of the duties of their office, the contemners of
the Church."[268] "The clergy," he goes on to say, "became tyrannical
because they usurped to themselves a power which they ought to have
shared with others; and as the people dread the return of this tyranny
of ecclesiastical authority, it is wiser for the Protestant clergy to
make no use of the similar power of excommunication which is intrusted
to them."

Calvin, as the subject of an absolute monarch, and the ruling spirit in
a republic, differed both from the German and the Swiss reformers in his
idea of the State both in its object and in its duty towards the Church.
An exile from his own country, he had lost the associations and habits
of monarchy, and his views of discipline as well as doctrine were
matured before he took up his abode in Switzerland.[269] His system was
not founded on existing facts; it had no roots in history, but was
purely ideal, speculative, and therefore more consistent and inflexible
than any other. Luther's political ideas were bounded by the horizon of
the monarchical absolutism under which he lived. Zwingli's were
influenced by the democratic forms of his native country, which gave to
the whole community the right of appointing the governing body. Calvin,
independent of all such considerations, studied only how his doctrine
could best be realised, whether through the instrumentality of existing
authorities, or at their expense. In his eyes its interests were
paramount, their promotion the supreme duty, opposition to them an
unpardonable crime. There was nothing in the institutions of men, no
authority, no right, no liberty, that he cared to preserve, or towards
which he entertained any feelings of reverence or obligation.

His theory made the support of religious truth the end and office of the
State,[270] which was bound therefore to protect, and consequently to
obey, the Church, and had no control over it. In religion the first and
highest thing was the dogma: the preservation of morals was one
important office of government; but the maintenance of the purity of
doctrine was the highest. The result of this theory is the institution
of a pure theocracy. If the elect were alone upon the earth, Calvin
taught, there would be no need of the political order, and the
Anabaptists would be right in rejecting it;[271] but the elect are in a
minority; and there is the mass of reprobates who must be coerced by the
sword, in order that all the world may be made subject to the truth, by
the conquerors imposing their faith upon the vanquished.[272] He wished
to extend religion by the sword, but to reserve death as the punishment
of apostasy; and as this law would include the Catholics, who were in
Calvin's eyes apostates from the truth, he narrowed it further to those
who were apostates from the community. In this way, he said, there was
no pretext given to the Catholics to retaliate.[273] They, as well as
the Jews and Mohammedans, must be allowed to live: death was only the
penalty of Protestants who relapsed into error; but to them it applied
equally whether they were converted to the Church or joined the sects
and fell into unbelief. Only in cases where there was no danger of his
words being used against the Protestants, and in letters not intended
for publication, he required that Catholics should suffer the same
penalties as those who were guilty of sedition, on the ground that the
majesty of God must be as strictly avenged as the throne of the
king.[274]

If the defence of the truth was the purpose for which power was
intrusted to princes, it was natural that it should be also the
condition on which they held it. Long before the revolution of 1688,
Calvin had decided that princes who deny the true faith, "abdicate"
their crowns, and are no longer to be obeyed;[275] and that no oaths are
binding which are in contradiction to the interests of Protestantism.[276]
He painted the princes of his age in the blackest colours,[277] and
prayed to God for their destruction;[278] though at the same time he
condemned all rebellion on the part of his friends, so long as there were
great doubts of their success.[279] His principles, however, were often
stronger than his exhortations, and he had difficulty in preventing murders
and seditious movements in France,[280] When he was dead, nobody prevented
them, and it became clear that his system, by subjecting the civil power
to the service of religion, was more dangerous to toleration than Luther's
plan of giving to the State supremacy over the Church.

Calvin was as positive as Luther in asserting the duty of obedience to
rulers irrespective of their mode of government[281] He constantly
declared that tyranny was not to be resisted on political grounds; that
no civil rights could outweigh the divine sanction of government; except
in cases where a special office was appointed for the purpose. Where
there was no such office--where, for instance, the estates of the realm
had lost their independence--there was no protection. This is one of the
most important and essential characteristics of the politics of the
reformers. By making the protection of their religion the principal
business of government, they put out of sight its more immediate and
universal duties, and made the political objects of the State disappear
behind its religious end. A government was to be judged, in their eyes,
only by its fidelity to the Protestant Church. If it fulfilled those
requirements, no other complaints against it could be entertained. A
tyrannical prince could not be resisted if he was orthodox; a just
prince could be dethroned if he failed in the more essential condition
of faith. In this way Protestantism became favourable at once to
despotism and to revolution, and was ever ready to sacrifice good
government to its own interests. It subverted monarchies, and, at the
same time, denounced those who, for political causes, sought their
subversion; but though the monarchies it subverted were sometimes
tyrannical, and the seditions it prevented sometimes revolutionary, the
order it defended or sought to establish was never legitimate and free,
for it was always invested with the function of religious
proselytism,[282] and with the obligation of removing every traditional,
social, or political right or power which could oppose the discharge of
that essential duty.

The part Calvin had taken in the death of Servetus obliged him to
develop more fully his views on the punishment of heresy. He wrote a
short account of the trial,[283] and argued that governments are bound
to suppress heresy, and that those who deny the justice of the
punishment, themselves deserve it.[284] The book was signed by all the
clergy of Geneva, as Calvin's compurgators. It was generally considered
a failure; and a refutation appeared, which was so skilful as to produce
a great sensation in the Protestant world.[285] This famous tract, now
of extreme rarity, did not, as has been said, "contain the pith of those
arguments which have ultimately triumphed in almost every part of
Europe;" nor did it preach an unconditional toleration.[286] But it
struck hard at Calvin by quoting a passage from the first edition of his
_Institutes_, afterwards omitted, in which he spoke for toleration.
"Some of those," says the author, "whom we quote have subsequently
written in a different spirit. Nevertheless, we have cited the earlier
opinion as the true one, as it was expressed under the pressure of
persecution,"[287] The first edition, we are informed by Calvin himself,
was written for the purpose of vindicating the Protestants who were put
to death, and of putting a stop to the persecution. It was anonymous,
and naturally dwelt on the principles of toleration.

Although this book did not denounce all intolerance, and although it was
extremely moderate, Calvin and his friends were filled with horror.
"What remains of Christianity," exclaimed Beza, "if we silently admit
what this man has expectorated in his preface?... Since the beginning of
Christianity no such blasphemy was ever heard."[288] Beza undertook to
defend Calvin in an elaborate work,[289] in which it was easy for him to
cite the authority of all the leading reformers in favour of the
practice of putting heretics to death, and in which he reproduced all
the arguments of those who had written on the subject before him. More
systematic than Calvin, he first of all excludes those who are not
Christians--the Jews, Turks, and heathen--whom his inquiry does not
touch; "among Christians," he proceeds to say, "some are schismatics,
who sin against the peace of the Church, or disbelievers, who reject her
doctrine. Among these, some err in all simplicity; and if their error is
not very grave, and if they do not seduce others, they need not be
punished."[290] "But obstinate heretics are far worse than parricides,
and deserve death, even if they repent."[291] "It is the duty of the
State to punish them, for the whole ecclesiastical order is upheld by
the political."[292] In early ages this power was exercised by the
temporal sovereigns; they convoked councils, punished heretics,
promulgated dogmas. The Papacy afterwards arose, in evil times, and was
a great calamity; but it was preferable a hundred times to the anarchy
which was defended under the name of merciful toleration.

The circumstances of the condemnation of Servetus make it the most
perfect and characteristic example of the abstract intolerance of the
reformers. Servetus was guilty of no political crime; he was not an
inhabitant of Geneva, and was on the point of leaving it, and nothing
immoral could be attributed to him. He was not even an advocate of
absolute toleration.[293] The occasion of his apprehension was a dispute
between a Catholic and a Protestant, as to which party was most zealous
in suppressing egregious errors. Calvin, who had long before declared
that if Servetus came to Geneva he should never leave it alive,[294] did
all he could to obtain his condemnation by the Inquisition at Vienne. At
Geneva he was anxious that the sentence should be death,[295] and in
this he was encouraged by the Swiss churches, but especially by Beza,
Farel, Bullinger, and Peter Martyr.[296] All the Protestant authorities,
therefore, agreed in the justice of putting a writer to death in whose
case all the secondary motives of intolerance were wanting. Servetus was
not a party leader. He had no followers who threatened to upset the
peace and unity of the Church. His doctrine was speculative, without
power or attraction for the masses, like Lutheranism; and without
consequences subversive of morality, or affecting in any direct way the
existence of society, like Anabaptism.[297] He had nothing to do with
Geneva, and his persecutors would have rejoiced if he had been put to
death elsewhere. "Bayle," says Hallam,[298] "has an excellent remark on
this controversy." Bayle's remark is as follows: "Whenever Protestants
complain, they are answered by the right which Calvin and Beza
recognised in magistrates; and to this day there has been nobody who has
not failed pitiably against this _argumentum ad hominem_."

No question of the merits of the Reformation or of persecution is
involved in an inquiry as to the source and connection of the opinions
on toleration held by the Protestant reformers. No man's sentiments on
the rightfulness of religious persecution will be affected by the
theories we have described, and they have no bearing whatever on
doctrinal controversy. Those who--in agreement with the principle of the
early Church, that men are free in matters of conscience--condemn all
intolerance, will censure Catholics and Protestants alike. Those who
pursue the same principle one step farther and practically invert it, by
insisting on the right and duty not only of professing but of extending
the truth, must, as it seems to us, approve the conduct both of
Protestants and Catholics, unless they make the justice of the
persecution depend on the truth of the doctrine defended, in which case
they will divide on both sides. Such persons, again, as are more
strongly impressed with the cruelty of actual executions than with the
danger of false theories, may concentrate their indignation on the
Catholics of Languedoc and Spain; while those who judge principles, not
by the accidental details attending their practical realisation, but by
the reasoning on which they are founded, will arrive at a verdict
adverse to the Protestants. These comparative inquiries, however, have
little serious interest. If we give our admiration to tolerance, we must
remember that the Spanish Moors and the Turks in Europe have been more
tolerant than the Christians; and if we admit the principle of
intolerance, and judge its application by particular conditions, we are
bound to acknowledge that the Romans had better reason for persecution
than any modern State, since their empire was involved in the decline of
the old religion, with which it was bound up, whereas no Christian
polity has been subverted by the mere presence of religious dissent. The
comparison is, moreover, entirely unreasonable, for there is nothing in
common between Catholic and Protestant intolerance. The Church began
with the principle of liberty, both as her claim and as her rule; and
external circumstances forced intolerance upon her, after her spirit of
unity had triumphed, in spite both of the freedom she proclaimed and of
the persecutions she suffered. Protestantism set up intolerance as an
imperative precept and as a part of its doctrine, and it was forced to
admit toleration by the necessities of its position, after the rigorous
penalties it imposed had failed to arrest the process of internal
dissolution.[299]

At the time when this involuntary change occurred the sects that caused
it were the bitterest enemies of the toleration they demanded. In the
same age the Puritans and the Catholics sought a refuge beyond the
Atlantic from the persecution which they suffered together under the
Stuarts. Flying for the same reason, and from the same oppression, they
were enabled respectively to carry out their own views in the colonies
which they founded in Massachusetts and Maryland, and the history of
those two States exhibits faithfully the contrast between the two
Churches. The Catholic emigrants established, for the first time in
modern history, a government in which religion was free, and with it the
germ of that religious liberty which now prevails in America. The
Puritans, on the other hand, revived with greater severity the penal
laws of the mother country. In process of time the liberty of conscience
in the Catholic colony was forcibly abolished by the neighbouring
Protestants of Virginia; while on the borders of Massachusetts the new
State of Rhode Island was formed by a party of fugitives from the
intolerance of their fellow-colonists.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 193: _The Rambler_, March 1862.]

[Footnote 194: "Le vrai principe de Luther est celui-ci: La volonté est
esclave par nature.... Le libre examen a été pour Luther un moyen et non
un principe. Il s'en est servi, et était contraint de s'en servir pour
établir son vrai principe, qui était la toute-puissance de la foi et de
la grâce.... C'est ainsi que le libre examen s'imposa au Protestantisme.
L'accessoire devint le principal, et la forme dévora plus ou moins le
fond" (Janet, _Histoire de la Philosophie Morale_, ii. 38. 39).]

[Footnote 195: "If they prohibit true doctrine, and punish their
subjects for receiving the entire sacrament, as Christ ordained it,
compel the people to idolatrous practices, with masses for the dead,
indulgences, invocation of saints, and the like, in these things they
exceed their office, and seek to deprive God of the obedience due to
Him. For God requires from us this above all, that we hear His Word, and
follow it; but where the Government desires to prevent this, the
subjects must know that they are not bound to obey it" (Luther's
_Werke_, xiii. 2244). "Non est, mi Spalatine, principum et istius
saeculi Pontificum tueri verbum Dei, nec ea gratia ullorum peto
praesidium" (Luther's _Briefe_, ed. De Wette, i. 521, Nov. 4, 1520). "I
will compel and urge by force no man; for the faith must be voluntary
and not compulsory, and must be adopted without violence" ("Sermonen an
Carlstadt," _Werke_, xx. 24, 1522).]

[Footnote 196: "Schrift an den christlichen Adel" (_Werke_, x. 574, June
1520). His proposition, _Haereticos comburi esse contra voluntatem
spiritus_, was one of those condemned by Leo X. as pestilent,
scandalous, and contrary to Christian charity.]

[Footnote 197: "Nihil non tentabunt Romanenses, nec potest satis
Huttenus me monere, adeo mihi de veneno timet" (De Wette, i. 487).
"Etiam inimici mei quidam miserti per amicos ex Halberstadio fecerunt
moneri me: esse quemdam doctorem medicinae, qui arte magica factus pro
libito invisibilis, quemdam occidit, mandatum habentem et occidendi
Lutheri, venturumque ad futuram Dominicam ostensionis reliquiarum: valde
hoc constanter narratur" (De Wette, i. 441). "Est hic apud nos Judaeus
Polonus, missus sub pretio 2000 aureorum, ut me veneno perdat, ab amicis
per literas mihi proditus. Doctor est medicinae, et nihil non audere et
facere paratus incredibili astutia et agilitate" (De Wette, ii. 616).
See also Jarcke, _Studien zur Geschichte der Reformation_, p. 176.]

[Footnote 198: "Multa ego premo et causa principis et universitatis
nostrae cohibeo, quae (si alibi essem) evomerem in vastatricem
Scripturae et Ecclesiae Romanae.... Timeo miser, ne forte non sim dignus
pati et occidi pro tali causa: erit ista felicitas meliorum hominum, non
tam foedi peccatoris. Dixi tibi semper me paratum esse cedere loco, si
qua ego principi ill. viderer periculo hic vivere. Aliquando certe
moriendum est, quanquam jam edita vernacula quadam apologia satis aduler
Romanae Ecclesiae et Pontifici, si quid forte id prosit" (De Wette, i.
260, 261). "Ubi periculum est, ne iis protectoribus tutus saevius in
Romanenses sim grassaturus, quam si sub principis imperio publicis
militarem officiis docendi.... Ego vicissim, nisi ignem habere nequeam
damnabo, publiceque concremabo jus pontificium totum, id est, lernam
illam haeresium; et finem habebit humilitatis exhibitae hactenusque
frustratae observantia qua nolo amplius inflari hostes Evangelii"
(_Ibid._ pp. 465, 466, July 10, 1520).]

[Footnote 199: "Out of the Gospel and divine truth come devilish lies;
... from the blood in our body comes corruption; out of Luther come
Müntzer, and rebels, Anabaptists, Sacramentarians, and false brethren"
(_Werke_, i. 75).]

[Footnote 200: "Habemus," wrote Erasmus, "fructum tui spiritus.... Non
agnoscis hosce seditiosos, opinor, sed illi te agnoscunt ... nec tamen
efficis quominus credant homines per tuos libellos ... pro libertare
evangelica, contra tyrannidem humanam, hisce tumultibus fuisse datam
occasionem." "And who will deny," adds a Protestant classic, "that the
fault was partly owing to them?" (Planck, _Geschichte der
protestantischen Kirche_, ii, 183).]

[Footnote 201: "Ich sehe das wohl, dass der Teufel, so er mich bisher
nicht hat mögen umbringen durch den Pabst, sucht er mich durch die
blutdürstigen Mordpropheten und Rottengeisten, so unter euch sind, zu
vertilgen und auffressen" (_Werke_, xvi. 77).]

[Footnote 202: Schenkel. _Wesen des Protestantismus_, iii. 348, 351;
Hagen, _Geist der Reformation_, ii. 146, 151; Menzel, _Neuere Geschichte
der Deutschen_, i. 115.]

[Footnote 203: See the best of his biographies, Jürgens, _Luther's
Leben_, iii. 601.]

[Footnote 204: "Quid hoc ad me? qui sciam etiam Turcam honorandum et
ferendum potestatis gratia. Quia certus sum non nisi volente Deo ullam
potestatem consistere" (De Wette, i. 236).]

[Footnote 205: "I beg first of all that you will not help to mollify
Count Albert in these matters, but let him go on as he has begun....
Encourage him to go on briskly, to leave things in the hands of God, and
obey His divine command to wield the sword as long as he can." "Do not
allow yourselves to be much disturbed, for it will redound to the
advantage of many souls that will be terrified by it, and preserved."
"If there are innocent persons amongst them, God will surely save and
preserve them, as He did with Lot and Jeremiah. If He does not, then
they are certainly not innocent.... We must pray for them that they
obey, otherwise this is no time for compassion; just let the guns deal
with them." "Sentio melius esse omnes rusticos caedi quam principes et
magistratus, eo quod rustici sine autoritate Dei gladium accipiunt. Quam
nequitiam Satanae sequi non potest nisi mera Satanica vastitas regni
Dei, et mundi principes etsi excedunt, tamen gladium autoritate Dei
gerunt. Ibi utrumque regnum consistere potest, quare nulla misericordia,
nulla patientia rusticis debetur, sed ira et indignatio Dei et hominum"
(De Wette, ii. 653, 655, 666, 669, 671).]

[Footnote 206: "Wir lehren die christlich Obrigkeit möge nicht nur,
sondern solle auch sich der Religion und Glaubenssachen mit Ernst
annehmen; davon halten die Wiedertäufer steif das Widerspiel, welches
sie auch zum Theil gemein haben mit den Prälaten der römischen Kirche"
(Declaration of the Protestants, quoted in Jörg, _Deutschland von 1522
bis 1526_, p. 709).]

[Footnote 207: "As to your question, how they are to be punished, I do
not consider them blasphemers, but regard them in the light of the
Turks, or deluded Christians, whom the civil power has not to punish, at
least bodily. But if they refuse to acknowledge and to obey the civil
authority, then they forfeit all they have and are, for then sedition
and murder are certainly in their hearts" (De Wette, ii. 622; Osiander's
opinion in Jörg, p. 706).]

[Footnote 208: "Dass in dem Urtheil und desselben öffentlicher
Verkündigung keines Irrthums oder Ketzereien ... sondern allein der
Aufruhr und fürgenommenen Morderei, die ihm doch laut seiner Urgicht nie
lieb gewesen, gedacht werde" (Jörg, p. 708).]

[Footnote 209: "Principes nostri non cogunt ad fidem et Evangelion, sed
cohibent externas abominationes" (De Wette, iii. 50). "Wenn die
weltliche Obrigkeit die Verbrechen wider die zweite Gesetzestafel
bestrafen, und aus der menschlichen Gesellschaft tilgen solle, wie
vielmehr denn die Verbrechen wider die erste?" (Luther, _apud_ Bucholtz,
_Geschichte Ferdinands I._, iii. 571).]

[Footnote 210: Planck, iv. 61, explains why this was not thought of.]

[Footnote 211: Linde, _Staatskirche_, p. 23. "Der Papst sammt seinem
Haufen glaubt nicht; darum bekennen wir, er werde nicht selig, das ist
verdammt werden" (_Table-Talk_, ii. 350).]

[Footnote 212: Kaltenborn, _Vorläufer des Grotius_, 208.]

[Footnote 213: Möhler, _Symbolik_, 428.]

[Footnote 214: "Quodsi unam legem Mosi cogimur servare, eadem ratione et
circumcidemur, et totam legem servare oportebit.... Nunc vero non sumus
amplius sub lege Mosi, sed subjecti legibus civilibus in talibus rebus"
(Luther to Barnes, Sept. 5, 1531; De Wette, iv. 296).]

[Footnote 215: "All things that we find done by the patriarchs in the
Old Testament ought to be free and not forbidden. Circumcision is
abolished, but not so that it would be a sin to perform it, but
optional, neither sinful nor acceptable.... In like manner it is not
forbidden that a man should have more than one wife. Even at the present
day I could not prohibit it; but I would not recommend it" (Commentary
on Genesis, 1528; see Jarcke, _Studien_, p. 108). "Ego sane fateor, me
non posse prohibere, siquis plures velit uxores ducere, nec repugnat
sacris literis: verum tamen apud Christianos id exempli nollem primo
introduci, apud quos decet etiam ea intermittere, quae licita sunt, pro
vitando scandalo, et pro honestate vitae" (De Wette, ii. 459, Jan. 13,
1524). "From these instances of bigamy (Lamech, Jacob) no rule can be
drawn for our times; and such examples have no power with us Christians,
for we live under our authorities, and are subject to our civil laws"
(_Table-Talk_, v. 64).]

[Footnote 216: "Antequam tale repudium, probarem potius regi permitterem
alteram reginam quoque ducere, et exemplo patrum et regum duas simul
uxores seu reginas habere.... Si peccavit ducendo uxorem fratris mortui,
peccavit in legem humanam seu civilem; si autem repudiaverit, peccabit
in legem mere divinam" (De Wette, iv. 296). "Haud dubio rex Angliae
uxorem fratris mortui ductam retinere potest ... docendus quod has res
politicas commiserit Deus magistratibus, neque nos alligaverit ad
Moisen.... Si vult rex successioni prospicere, quanto satius est, id
facere sine infamia prioris conjugii. Ac potest id fieri sine ullo
periculo conscientiae cujuscunque aut famae per polygamiam. Etsi enim
non velim concedere polygamiam vulgo, dixi enim supra, nos non ferre
leges, tamen in hoc casu propter magnam utilitatem regni, fortassis
etiam propter conscientiam regis, ita pronuncio: tutissimum esse regi,
si ducat secundam uxorem, priore non abjecta, quia certum est polygamiam
non esse prohibitam jure divino, nec res est omnino inusitata"
(_Melanthonis Opera_, ed. Bretschneider, ii. 524, 526). "Nolumus esse
auctores divortii, cum conjugium cum jure divino non pugnet. Hi, qui
diversum pronunciant, terribiliter exaggerant et exasperant jus divinum.
Nos contra exaggeramus in rebus politicis auctoritatem magistratus, quae
profecto non est levis, multaque justa sunt propter magistratus
auctoritatem, quae alioqui in dubium vocantur" (Melanchthon to Bucer,
Bretschneider, ii. 552).]

[Footnote 217: "Suadere non possumus ut introducatur publice et velut
lege sanciatur permissio, plures quam unam uxores ducendi.... Primum
ante omnia cavendum, ne haec res inducatur in orbem ad modum legis, quam
sequendi libera omnibus sit potestas. Deinde considerare dignetur vestra
celsitudo scandalum, nimirum quod Evangelio hostes exclamaturi sint, nos
similes esse Anabaptistis, qui plures simul duxerunt uxores" (De Wette,
v. 236. Signed by Luther, Melanchthon, and Bucer).]

[Footnote 218: "He that would appear wise will not be satisfied with
anything that others do; he must do something for himself, and that must
be better than anything. This fool (Copernicus) wants to overturn the
whole science of astronomy. But, as the holy Scriptures tell us, Joshua
told the sun to stand still, and not the earth" (_Table-Talk_, iv.
575).]

[Footnote 219: "Das ist die christliche Freiheit, der einige Glaube, der
da macht, nicht dass wir müssig gehen oder übel thun mögen, sondern dass
wir keines Werks bedürfen, die Frömmigkeit und Seligkeit zu erlangen"
(_Sermon von der Freiheit_). A Protestant historian, who quotes this
passage, goes on to say: "On the other hand, the body must be brought
under discipline by every means, in order that it may obey and not
burden the inner man. Outward servitude, therefore, assists the progress
towards internal freedom" (Bensen, _Geschichte des Bauernkriegs_, 269.)]

[Footnote 220: _Werke_, x. 413.]

[Footnote 221: "According to Scripture, it is by no means proper that
one who would be a Christian should set himself against his superiors,
whether by God's permission they act justly or unjustly. But a Christian
must suffer violence and wrong, especially from his superiors.... As the
emperor continues emperor, and princes, though they transgress all God's
commandments, yea, even if they be heathen, so they do even when they do
not observe their oath and duty.... Sin does not suspend authority and
allegiance" (De Wette, iii. 560).]

[Footnote 222: Ranke, _Reformation_, iii. 183.]

[Footnote 223: Ranke, iv. 7; Jürgens, iii. 601.]

[Footnote 224: Newman, _Lectures on Justification_, p. 386.]

[Footnote 225: "Was durch ordentliche Gewalt geschieht, ist nicht für
Aufruhr zu halten" (Bensen, p. 269; Jarcke, _Studien_, p. 312; Janet,
ii. 40).]

[Footnote 226: "Princes, and all rulers and governments, however pious
and God-fearing they may be, cannot be without sin in their office and
temporal administration.... They cannot always be so exactly just and
successful as some wiseacres suppose; therefore they are above all in
need of the forgiveness of sins" (see Kaltenborn, p. 209).]

[Footnote 227: "Of old, under the Papacy, princes and lords, and all
judges, were very timid in shedding blood, and punishing robbers,
murderers, thieves, and all manner of evil-doers; for they knew not how
to distinguish a private individual who is not in office from one in
office, charged with the duty of punishing.... The executioner had
always to do penance, and to apologise beforehand to the convicted
criminal for what he was going to do to him, just as if it was sinful
and wrong." "Thus they were persuaded by monks to be gracious,
indulgent, and peaceable. But authorities, princes and lords ought not
to be merciful" (_Table-Talk_, iv. 159, 160).]

[Footnote 228: "Den weltlichen Bann sollten Könige und Kaiser wieder
aufrichten, denn wir können ihn jetzt nicht anrichten.... Aber so wir
nicht können die Sünde des Lebens bannen und strafen, so bannen wir doch
die Sünde der Lehre" (Bruns, _Luther's Predigten_, 63).]

[Footnote 229: "Wo sie solche Rottengeister würden zulassen und leiden,
so sie es doch wehren und vorkommen können, würden sie ihre Gewissen
gräulich beschweren, und vielleicht nimmermehr widder stillen können,
nicht allein der Seelen halben, die dadurch verführt und verdammt werden
... sondern auch der gauzen heiligen Kirchen halben" (De Wette, iv.
355).]

[Footnote 230: "Nu ist alle Abgötterey gegen die Messe ein geringes" (De
Wette, v. 191; sec. iv. 307)]

[Footnote 231: Bucholtz, iii. 570.]

[Footnote 232: "Sie aber verachten die Schrift muthwilliglich, darum
wären sie billig aus der einigen Ursach zu stillen, oder nicht zu
leiden" (De Wette, iii. 90).]

[Footnote 233: "Wollen sie aber wie die Juden seyn, nicht Christen
heissen, noch Kaisers Glieder, sondern sich lassen Christus und Kaisers
Feinde nennen, wie die Juden; wohlan, so wollen wir's auch leiden, dass
sie in ihren Synagogen, wie die Juden, verschlossen lästern, so lang sie
wollen" (De Wette, iv. 94).]

[Footnote 234: Riffel, _Kirchengeschichte_, ii. 9; _Table-Talk_, iii.
175.]

[Footnote 235: "Ego ab initio, cum primum caepi nosse Ciconiam et
Ciconiae factionem, unde hoc totum genus Anabaptistarum exortum est, fui
stulte clemens. Sentiebant enim et alii haereticos non esse ferro
opprimendos. Et tunc dux Fridericus vehementer iratus erat Ciconiae: ac
nisi a nobis tectus esset, fuisset de homine furioso et perdite malo
sumtum supplicium. Nunc me ejus clementiae non parum poenitet....
Brentius nimis clemens est" (Bretschneider, ii. 17, Feb. 1530).]

[Footnote 236: "Sed objiciunt exemplum nobis periculosum: si haec
pertinent ad magistratus, quoties igitur magistratus judicabit aliquos
errare, saeviet in eos. Caesar igitur debet nos opprimere, quoniam ita
judicat nos errare. Respondeo: certe debet errores et prohibere et
punire.... Non est enim solius Caesaris cognitio, sicut in urbibus haec
cognitio non est tantum magistratus prophani, sed est doctorum. Viderit
igitur magistratus ut recte judicet" (Bretschneider, ii. 712).
"Deliberent igitur principes, non cum tyrannis, non cum pontificibus,
non cum hypocritis, monachis aut aliis, sed cum ipsa Evangelii voce, cum
probatis scriptoribus" (Bretschneider, iii. 254).]

[Footnote 237: "Quare ita sentias, magistratum debere uti summa
severitate in coercendis hujusmodi spiritibus.... Sines igitur novis
exemplis timorem incuti multitudini ... ad haec notae tibi sint causae
seditionum, quas gladio prohiberi oportet.... Propterea sentio de his
qui etiamsi non defendunt seditiosos articulos, habent manifeste
blasphemos, quod interfici a magistratu debeant" (ii. 17, 18). "De
Anabaptistis tulimus hic in genere sententiam: quia constat sectam
diabolicam esse, non esse tolerandam: dissipari enim ecclesias per eos,
cum ipsi nullam habeant certam doctrinam.... Ideo in capita factionum in
singulis locis ultima supplicia constituenda esse judicavimus" (ii.
549). "It is clear that it is the duty of secular government to punish
blasphemy, false doctrine, and heresy, on the bodies of those who are
guilty of them.... Since it is evident that there are gross errors in
the articles of the Anabaptist sect, we conclude that in this case the
obstinate ought to be punished with death" (iii. 199). "Propter hanc
causam Deus ordinavit politias ut Evangelium propagari possit ... nec
revocamus politiam Moysi, sed lex moralis perpetua est omnium aetatum
... quandocumque constat doctrinam esse impiam, nihil dubium est quin
sanior pars Ecclesiae debeat malos pastores removere et abolere impios
cultus. Et hanc emendationem praecipue adjuvare debent magistratus,
tanquam potiora membra Ecclesiae" (iii. 242, 244). "Thammerus, qui
Mahometicas seu Ethnicas opiniones spargit, vagatur in dioecesi
Mindensi, quem publicis suppliciis adficere debebant.... Evomuit
blasphemias, quae refutandae sunt non tantum disputatione aut scriptis,
sed etiam justo officio pii magistratus" (ix. 125, 131).]

[Footnote 238: "Voco autem blasphemos qui articulos habent, qui proprie
non pertinent ad civilem statum, sed continent [Greek: theôrias] ut de
divinitate Christi et similes. Etsi enim gradus quidam sunt, tamen huc
etiam refero baptismum infantum.... Quia magistratui commissa est tutela
totius legis, quod attinet ad externam disciplinam et externa facta.
Quare delicta externa contra primam tabulam prohibere ac punire
debet.... Quare non solum concessum est, sed etiam mandatum est
magistratui, impias doctrinas abolere, et tueri pias in suis ditionibus"
(ii. 711). "Ecclesiastica potestas tantum judicat et excommunicat
haereticos, non occidit. Sed potestas civilis debet constituere poenas
et supplicia in haereticos, sicut in blasphemos constituit supplicia....
Non enim plectitur fides, sed haeresis" (xii. 697).]

[Footnote 239: "Notum est etiam, quosdam tetra et [Greek: dysphéma]
dixisse de sanguine Christi, quos puniri oportuit, et propter gloriam
Christi, et exempli causa" (viii. 553). "Argumentatur ille praestigiator
(Schwenkfeld), verbum externum non esse medium, quo Deus est efficax.
Talis sophistica principum severitate compescenda erat" (ix. 579).]

[Footnote 240: "The office of preacher is distinct from that of
governor, yet both have to contribute to the praise of God. Princes are
not only to protect the goods and bodily life of their subjects, but the
principal function is to promote the honour of God, and to prevent
idolatry and blasphemy" (iii. 199). "Errant igitur magistratus, qui
divellunt gubernationem a fine, et se tantum pacis ac ventris custodes
esse existimant.... At si tantum venter curandus esset, quid differrent
principes ab armentariis? Nam longe aliter sentiendum est. Politias
divinitus admirabili sapientia et bonitate constitutas esse, non tantum
ad quaerenda et fruenda ventris bona, sed multo magis, ut Deus in
societate innotescat, ut aeterna bona quaerantur" (iii. 246).]

[Footnote 241: "Neque illa barbarica excusatio audienda est, leges illas
pertinere ad politiam Mosaicam, non ad nostram. Ut Decalogus ipse ad
omnes pertinet, ita judex ubique omnia Decalogi officia in externa
disciplina tueatur" (viii. 520).]

[Footnote 242: "Legi scriptum tuum, in quo refutasti luculenter
horrendas Serveti blasphemias, ac filio Dei gratias ago, qui fuit
[Greek: brabeutês] hujus tui agonis. Tibi quoque Ecclesia et nunc et ad
posteros gratitudinem debet et debebit. Tuo judicio prorsus adsentior.
Affirmo etiam, vestros magistratus juste fecisse, quod hominem
blasphemum, re ordine judicata, interfecerunt" (Melanchthon to Calvin,
Bretschneider, viii. 362). "Judico etiam Senatum Genevensem recte
fecisse, quod hominem pertinacem et non omissurum blasphemias sustulit.
Ac miratus sum, esse, qui severitatem illam improbent" (viii. 523).
"Dedit vero et Genevensis reip. magistratus ante annos quatuor punitae
insanabilis blasphemiae adversus filium Dei, sublato Serveto Arragone
pium et memorabile ad omnem posteritatem exemplum" (ix. 133).]

[Footnote 243: "Abusus missae per magistratus debet tolli. Non aliter,
atque sustulit aeneum serpentem Ezechias, aut excelsa demolitus est
Josias" (i. 480). "Politicis magistratibus severissime mandatum est, ut
suo quisque loco manibus et armis tollant statuas, ad quas fiunt hominum
concursus et invocationes, et puniant suppliciis corporum insanabiles,
qui idolorum cultum pertinaciter retinent, aut blasphemias serunt" (ix.
77).]

[Footnote 244: "If the French and English community at Frankfort shared
the errors of Servetus or Thamer, or other enemies of the Symbols, or
the errors of the Anabaptists on infant baptism, against the authority
of the State, etc., I should faithfully advise and strongly recommend
that they should be soon driven away; for the civil power is bound to
prevent and to punish proved blasphemy and sedition. But I find that
this community is orthodox in the symbolical articles on the Son of God,
and in other articles of the Symbol.... If the faith of the citizens in
every town were inquired into, what trouble and confusion would not
arise in many countries and towns!" (ix. 179).]

[Footnote 245: Schmidt, _Philipp Melanchthon_, p. 640. His exhortations
to the Landgrave to put down the Zwinglians are characteristic: "The
Zwinglians, without waiting for the Council, persecute the Papists and
the Anabaptists; why must it be wrong for others to prohibit their
indefensible doctrine independent of the Council?" Philip replied:
"Forcibly, to prohibit a doctrine which neither contradicts the articles
of faith nor encourages sedition, I do not think right.... When Luther
began to write and to preach, he admonished and instructed the
Government that it had no right to forbid books or to prevent preaching,
and that its office did not extend so far, but that it had only to
govern the body and goods.... I had not heard before that the Zwinglians
persecute the Papists; but if they abolish abuses, it is not unjust, for
the Papists wish to deserve heaven by their works, and so blaspheme the
Son of God. That they should persecute the Anabaptists is also not
wrong, for their doctrine is in part seditious." The divines answered:
"If by God's grace our true and necessary doctrine is tolerated as it
has hitherto been by the emperor, though reluctantly, we think that we
ought not to prevent it by undertaking the defence of the Zwinglian
doctrine, if that should not be tolerated. ... As to the argument that
we ought to spare the people while persecuting the leaders, our answer
is, that it is not a question of persons, but only of doctrine, whether
it be true or false" (Correspondence of Brenz and Melanchthon with
Landgrave Philip of Hesse, Bretschneider, ii. 95, 98, 101).]

[Footnote 246: Hardwicke, _Reformation_, p. 274.]

[Footnote 247: Seidemann, _Thomas Münzer_, p. 35.]

[Footnote 248: Schenkel, iii. 381.]

[Footnote 249: Heinrich Grosbeck's _Bericht_, ed. Cornelius, 19.]

[Footnote 250: Herzog, _Encyclopädie für protestantische Theologie_, ii.
418.]

[Footnote 251: Bussierre, _Establissement du Protestantisme en Alsace_,
p. 429.]

[Footnote 252: Baum, _Capito und Butzer_, p. 489.]

[Footnote 253: Baum, p. 492; Erbkam, _Protestantische Sekten_, p. 581.]

[Footnote 254: Ursinus writes to Bullinger: "Liberavit nos Deus ab
idolatria: succedit licentia infinita et horribilis divini nominis,
ecclesiae doctrinae purioris et sacramentorum prophanatio et sub pedibus
porcorum et canum, conniventibus atque utinam non defendentibus iis qui
prohibere suo loco debebant, conculcatio" (Sudhoff, _Olevianus und
Ursinus_, p. 340).]

[Footnote 255: "Adserere audemus, neminem magistratum recte gerere ne
posse quidem, nisi Christianus sit" (Zuingli, _Opera_, iii. 296). "If
they shall proceed in an unbrotherly way, and against the ordinance of
Christ, then let them be deposed, in God's name" (Schenkel, iii. 362).]

[Footnote 256: Christoffel, _Huldreich Zwingli_, p. 251.]

[Footnote 257: Zwingli's advice to the Protestants of St. Gall, in
Pressel, _Joachim Vadian_, p. 45.]

[Footnote 258: Pestalozzi, _Heinrich Bullinger_, p. 95.]

[Footnote 259: _Ibid._, _Leo Judä_, p. 50.]

[Footnote 260: Pestalozzi, _Heinrich Bullinger_, p. 146.]

[Footnote 261: _Ibid._ p. 149.]

[Footnote 262: _Ibid._ p. 270.]

[Footnote 263: Pestalozzi, _Heinrich Bullinger_, p. 426.]

[Footnote 264: In the year 1555 he writes to Socinus: "I too am of
opinion that heretical men must be cut off with the spiritual sword....
The Lutherans at first did not understand that sectaries must be
restrained and punished, but after the fall of Münster, when thousands
of poor misguided men, many of them orthodox, had perished, they were
compelled to admit that it is wiser and better for the Government not
only to restrain wrong-headed men, but also, by putting to death a few
that deserve it, to protect thousands of inhabitants" (_Ibid._ p. 428).]

[Footnote 265: Herzog, _Leben Oekolampads_, ii 197.]

[Footnote 266: _Ibid._ p. 189.]

[Footnote 267: _Ibid._ p. 206.]

[Footnote 268: Herzog, _Leben Oekolampads_, ii. 195. Herzog finds an
excuse for the harsh treatment of the Lutherans at Basel in the still
greater severity of the Lutheran Churches against the followers of the
Swiss reformation (_Ibid._ 213).]

[Footnote 269: Hundeshagen, _Conflikte des Zwinglianismus und
Calvinismus_, 41.]

[Footnote 270: "Huc spectat (politia) ... ne idololatria, ne in Dei
nomen sacrilegia, ne adversus ejus veritatem blasphemiae aliaeque
religionis offensiones publice emergant ac in populum spargantur....
Politicam ordinationem probo, quae in hoc incumbit, ne vera religio,
quae Dei lege continetur, palam, publicisque sacrilegiis impune
violetur" (_Institutio Christianae Religionis_, ed. Tholuck, ii. 477).
"Hoc ergo summopere requiritur a regibus, ut gladio quo praediti sunt
utuntur ad cultum Dei asserendum" (_Praelectiones in Prophetas, Opera_,
v. 233, ed. 1667).]

[Footnote 271: "Huic etiam colligere promptum est, quam stulta fuerit
imaginatio eorum qui volebant usum gladii tollere e mundo, Evangelii
praetextu. Scimus Anabaptistas fuisse tumultuatos, quasi totus ordo
politicus repugnaret Christi regno, quia regnum Christi continetur sola
doctrina; deinde nulla futura sit vis. Hoc quidem verum esset, si
essemus in hoc mundo angeli: sed quemadmodum jam dixi, exiguus est
piorum numerus: ideo necesse est reliquam turbam cohiberi violento
freno: quia permixti sunt filii Dei vel saevis belluis, vel vulpibus et
fraudulentis hominibus" (_Pr. in Michaeam_, v. 310). "In quo non suam
modo inscitiam, sed diabolicum fastum produnt, dum perfectionem sibi
arrogant; cujus ne centesima quidem pars in illis conspicitur"
(_Institutio_, ii. 478).]

[Footnote 272: "Tota igitur excellentia, tota dignitas, tota potentia
Ecclesiae debet huc referri, ut omnia subjaceant Deo, et quicquid erit
in gentibus hoc totum sit sacrum, ut scilicet cultus Dei tam apud
victores quam apud victos vigeat" (_Pr. in Michaeam_, v. 317).]

[Footnote 273: "Ita tollitur offensio, quae multos imperitos fallit, dum
metuunt ne hoc praetextu ad saeviendum armentur Papae carnifices."
Calvin was warned by experience of the imprudence of Luther's language.
"In Gallis proceres in excusanda saevitia immani allegant autoritatem
Lutheri" (Melanchthon. _Opera_, v. 176).]

[Footnote 274: "Vous avez deux espèces de mutins qui se sont eslevez
entre le roy et l'estat du royaume: Les uns sont gens fantastiques, qui
soubs couleur de l'évangile vouldroient mettre tout en confusion. Les
aultres sont gens obstinés aux superstitions de l'Antéchrist de Rome.
Tous ensemble méritent bien d'estre réprimés par le glayve qui vous est
commis, veu qu'ils s'attaschent non seulement au roy, mais à Dieu qui
l'a assis au siège royal" (Calvin to Somerset, Oct. 22, 1540: _Lettres
de Calvin_, ed. Bonnet, i. 267. See also Henry, _Leben Calvins_, ii.
Append. 30).]

[Footnote 275: "Abdicant enim se potestate terreni principes dum
insurgunt contra Deum: imo indigni sunt qui censeantur in hominum
numero. Potius ergo conspuere oportet in ipsorum capita, quam illis
parere, ubi ita proterviunt ut velint etiam spoliare Deum jure suo, et
quasi occupare solium ejus, acsi possent eum a coelo detrahere" (_Pr. in
Danielem_, v. 91).]

[Footnote 276: "Quant au serment qu'on vous a contraincte de faire,
comme vous avez failli et offensé Dieu en le faisant, aussi n'estes-vous
tenue de le garder" (Calvin to the Duchess of Ferrara, _Bonnet_, ii.
338). She had taken an oath, at her husband's death, that she would not
correspond with Calvin.]

[Footnote 277: "In aulis regum videmus primas teneri a bestiis. Nam
hodie, ne repetamus veteres historias, ut reges fere omnes fatui sunt ac
bruti, ita etiam sunt quasi equi et asini brutorum animalium.... Reges
sunt hodie fere mancipia" (_Pr. in Danielem_, v. 82). "Videmus enim ut
hodie quoque pro sua libidine commoveant totum orbem principes; quia
produnt alii aliis innoxios populus, et exercent foedam nundinationem,
dum quisque commodum suum venatur, et sine ullo pudore, tantum ut augeat
suam potentiam, alios tradit in manum inimici" (_Pr. in Nahum_, v. 363).
"Hodie pudet reges aliquid prae se ferre humanum, sed omnes gestus
accommodant ad tyrannidem" (_Pr. in Jeremiam_, v. 257).]

[Footnote 278: "Sur ce que je vous avais allégué, quo David nous
instruict par son exemple de haïr les ennemis de Dieu, vous respondez
que c'estoit pour ce temps-là duquel sous la loi de rigueur il estoit
permis de haïr les ennemis. Or, madame, ceste glose seroit pour
renverser toute l'Escriture, et partant il la fault fuir comme une peste
mortelle.... Combien que j'aye tousjours prié Dieu de luy faire mercy,
si est-ce que j'ay souvent désiré que Dieu mist la main sur luy (Guise)
pour en deslivrer son Eglise, s'il ne le vouloit convertir" (Calvin to
the Duchess of Ferrara, _Bonnet_, ii. 551). Luther was in this respect
equally unscrupulous: "This year we must pray Duke Maurice to death, we
must kill him with our prayers; for he will be an evil man" (MS. quoted
in Döllinger, _Reformation_, iii, 266).]

[Footnote 279: "Quod de praepostero nostrorum fervore scribis,
verissimum est, neque tamen ulla occurrit moderandi ratio, quia sanis
consiliis non obtemperant. Passim denuntio, si judex essem me non minus
severe in rabioso, istos impetus vindicaturum, quam rex suis edictis
mandat. Pergendum nihilominus, quando nos Deus voluit stultis esse
debitores" (Calvin to Beza; Henry, _Leben Calvins_, iii. Append. 164).]

[Footnote 280: "Il n'a tenu qu'à moi que, devant la guerre, gens de
faict et d'exécution ne se soyent efforcez de l'exterminer du monde
(Guise) lesquels ont esté retenus par ma seule exhortation."--_Bonnet_,
ii. 553.]

[Footnote 281: "Hoc nobis si assidue ob animos et oculos obversetur,
eodem decreto constitui etiam nequissimos reges, quo regum auctoritas
statuitur; nunquam in animum nobis seditiosae illae cogitationes
venient, tractandum esse pro meritis regem nec aequum esse, ut subditos
ei nos praestemus, qui vicissim regem nobis se non praestet.... De
privatis hominibus semper loquor. Nam si qui nunc sint populares
magistratus ad moderandam regum libidinem constituti (quales olim erant
... ephori ... tribuni ... demarchi: et qua etiam forte potestate, ut
nunc res habent, funguntur in singulis regnis tres ordines, quum
primarios conventus peragunt) ... illos ferocienti regum licentiae pro
officio intercedere non veto" (_Institutio_, ii. 493, 495).]

[Footnote 282: "Quum ergo ita licentiose omnia sibi permittent
(Donatistae), volebant tamen impune manere sua scelera: et in primis
tenebant hoc principium: non esse poenas sumendas, si quis ab aliis
dissideret in religionis doctrina: quemadmodum hodie videmus quosdam de
hac re nimis cupide contendere. Certum est quid cupiant. Nam si quis
ipsos respiciat, sunt impii Dei contemptores: saltem vellent nihil
certum esse in religione; ideo labefactare, et quantum in se est etiam
convellere nituntur omnia pietatis principia. Ut ergo liceat ipsis
evomere virus suum, ideo tantopere litigant pro impunitate, et negant
poenas de haereticis et blasphemis sumendas esse" (_Pr. in Danielem_, v.
51).]

[Footnote 283: "Defensio Orthodoxae Fidei ... ubi ostenditur Haereticos
jure gladii coercendos esse," 1554.]

[Footnote 284: "Non modo liberum esse magistratibus poenas sumere de
coelestis doctrinae corruptoribus, sed divinitus esse mandatum, ut
pestiferis erroribus impunitatem dare nequeant, quin desciscant ab
officii sui fide.... Nunc vero quisquis haereticis et blasphemis injuste
paenam infligi contenderet, sciens et volens se obstringet blasphemiae
reatu.... Ubi a suis fundamentis convellitur religio, detestandae in
Deum blasphemiae proferuntur, impiis et pestiferis dogmatibus in exitium
rapiuntur animae; denique ubi palam defectio ab unico Deo puraque
doctrina tentatur, ad extremum illud remedium descendere necesse" (see
Schenkel, iii. 389; Dyer, _Life of Calvin_, p. 354; Henry, iii. 234).]

[Footnote 285: _De Haereticis an sint persequendi_, Magdeburgi, 1554.
Chataillon, to whom it is generally attributed, was not the author (see
Heppe, _Theodor Beza_, p. 37).]

[Footnote 286: Hallam, _Literature of Europe_, ii. 81; Schlosser, _Leben
des Beza_, p. 55. This is proved by the following passage from the
dedication: "This I say not to favour the heretics, whom I abhor, but
because there are here two dangerous rocks to be avoided. In the first
place, that no man should be deemed a heretic when he is not ... and
that the real rebel be distinguished from the Christian who, by
following the teaching and example of his Master, necessarily causes
separation from the wicked and unbelieving. The other danger is, lest
the real heretics be not more severely punished than the discipline of
the Church requires" (Baum, _Theodor Beza_, i. 215).]

[Footnote 287: "Multis piis hominibus in Gallia exustis grave passim
apud Germanos odium ignes illi excitaverant, sparsi sunt, ejus
restinguendi causa, improbi ac mendaces libelli, non alios tam
crudeliter tractari, quam Anabaptistas ac turbulentos homines, qui
perversis deliriis non religionem modo sed totum ordinem politicum
convellerent.... Haec mihi edendae Institutionis causa fuit, primum ut
ab injusta contumelia vindicarem fratres meos, quorum mors pretiosa erat
in conspectu Domini; deinde quum multis miseris eadem visitarent
supplicia, pro illis dolor saltem aliquis et sollicitudo exteras gentes
tangeret" (_Praefatio in Psalmos._ See "Historia Litteraria de Calvini
Institutione." in _Scrinium Antiquarium_, ii. 452).]

[Footnote 288: Baum, i. 206. "Telles gens," says Calvin, "seroient
contents qu'il n'y eust ne loy, ne bride au monde. Voilà pourquoy ils
ont basti ce beau libvre _De non comburendis Haereticis_, où ils out
falsifié les noms tant des villes que des personnes, non pour aultre
cause sinon pource que le dit livre est farcy de blasphèmes
insupportables" (Bonnet, ii. 18).]

[Footnote 289: _De Haereticis a civili Magistratu puniendis_, 1554.]

[Footnote 290: "Absit autem a nobis, ut in eos, qui vel simplicitate
peccant, sine aliorum pernicie et insigni blasphemia, vel in explicando
quopiam Scripturae loco dissident a recepta opinione, magistratum
armemus" (_Tractatus Theologici_, i. 95).]

[Footnote 291: This was sometimes the practice in Catholic countries,
where heresy was equivalent to treason. Duke William of Bavaria ordered
obstinate Anabaptists to be burnt; those who recanted to be beheaded.
"Welcher revocir, den soll man köpfen; welcher nicht revocir, den soll
man brennen" (Jörg, p. 717).]

[Footnote 292: "Ex quibus omnibus una conjunctio efficitur, istos quibus
haeretici videntur non esse puniendi, opinionem in Ecclesiam Dei conari
longe omnium pestilentissimam invehere et ex diametro repugnantem
doctrinae primum a Deo Patre proditae, deinde a Christo instauratae, ab
universa denique Ecclesia orthodoxa perpetuo consensu usurpatae, ut mihi
quidem magis absurde facere videantur quam si sacrilegas aut parricidas
puniendos negarent, quum sint istis omnibus haeretici infinitis partibus
deteriores" (_Tract. Theol._ i. 143).]

[Footnote 293: "Verum est quod correctione non exspectata Ananiam et
Sapphiram occidit Petrus. Quia Spiritus Sanctus tunc maxime vigens, quem
spreverant, docebat esse incorrigibiles, in malitia obstinatos. Hoc
crimen est morte simpliciter dignum et apud Deum et apud homines. In
aliis autem criminibus, ubi Spiritus Sanctus speciale quid non docet,
ubi non est inveterata malitia, aut obstinatio certa non apparet aut
atrocitas magna, correctionem per alias castigationes sperare potius
debemus" (Servetus, _Restitutio Christianismi_, 656; Henry, iii. 235).]

[Footnote 294: "Nam si venerit, modo valeat mea authoritas, vivum exire
nunquam patiar" (Calvin to Farel, in Henry, iii. Append. 65; Audin, _Vie
de Calvin_, ii. 314; Dyer, 544).]

[Footnote 295: "Spero capitale saltem fore judicium; poenae vero
atrocitatem remitti cupio" (Calvin to Farel, Henry, iii. 189). Dr. Henry
makes no attempt to clear Calvin of the imputation of having caused the
death of Servetus. Nevertheless he proposed, some years later, that the
three-hundredth anniversary of the execution should be celebrated in the
Church of Geneva by a demonstration. "It ought to declare itself in a
body, in a manner worthy of our principles, admitting that in past times
the authorities of Geneva were mistaken, loudly proclaiming toleration,
which is truly the crown of our Church, and paying due honour to Calvin,
because he had no hand in the business (parcequ'il n'a pas trempé dans
cette affaire), of which he has unjustly borne the whole burden." The
impudence of this declaration is surpassed by the editor of the French
periodical from which we extract it. He appends to the words in our
parenthesis the following note: "We underline in order to call attention
to this opinion of Dr. Henry, who is so thoroughly acquainted with the
whole question" (_Bulletin de la Société de l'Histoire du Protestantisme
Français_, ii. 114).]

[Footnote 296: "Qui scripserunt de non plectendis haereticis, semper
mihi visi sunt non parum errare" (Farel to Blaarer, Henry, iii. 202).
During the trial he wrote to Calvin: "If you desire to diminish the
horrible punishment, you will act as a friend towards your most
dangerous enemy. If I were to seduce anybody from the true faith, I
should consider myself worthy of death; I cannot judge differently of
another than of myself" (Schmidt, _Farel und Viret_, p. 33).

Before sentence was pronounced Bullinger wrote to Beza: "Quid vero
amplissimus Senatus Genevensis ageret cum blasphemo illo nebulone
Serveto. Si sapit et officium suum facit, caedit, ut totus orbis videat
Genevam Christi gloriam cupere servatam" (Baum, i. 204). With reference
to Socinus he wrote: "Sentio ego spirituali gladio abscindendos esse
homines haereticos" (Henry, iii. 225).

Peter Martyr Vermili also gave in his adhesion to Calvin's policy: "De
Serveto Hispano, quid aliud dicam non habeo, nisi eum fuisse genuinum
Diaboli filium, cujus pestifera et detestanda doctrina undique
profliganda est, neque magistratus, qui de illo supplicium extremum
sumpsit, accusandus est, cum emendationis nulla indiçia in eo possent
deprehendi, illiusque blasphemiae omnino intolerabiles essent" (_Loci
Communes_, 1114. See Schlosser, _Leben des Beza und des Peter Martyr
Vermili_, 512).

Zanchi, who at the instigation of Bullinger also published a treatise,
_De Haereticis Coercendis_, says of Beza's work: "Non poterit non
probari summopere piis omnibus. Satis superque respondit quidem ille
novis istis academicis, ita ut supervacanea et inutilis omnino videatur
mea tractatio" (Baum, i. 232).]

[Footnote 297: "The trial of Servetus," says a very ardent Calvinist,
"is illegal only in one point--the crime, if crime there be, had not
been committed at Geneva; but long before the Councils had usurped the
unjust privilege of judging strangers stopping at Geneva, although the
crimes they were accused of had not been committed there" (Haag, _La
France Protestante_, iii. 129).]

[Footnote 298: _Literature of Europe_, ii. 82.]

[Footnote 299: This is the ground taken by two Dutch divines in answer
to the consultation of John of Nassau in 1579: "Neque in imperio, neque
in Galliis, neque in Belgio speranda esset unquam libertas in externo
religionis exercitio nostris ... si non diversarum religionum exercitia
in una eademque provincia toleranda.... Sic igitur gladio adversus nos
armabimus Pontificios, si hanc hypothesin tuebimur, quod exercitium
religionis alteri parti nullum prorsus relinqui debeat" (_Scrinium
Antiquarium_, i. 335).]